The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Mary Frances First Aid Book, by Jane
Eayre Fryer, Illustrated by Jane Alen Boyer


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The Mary Frances First Aid Book
       With Ready Reference List of Ordinary Accidents and Illnesses, and Approved Home Remedies


Author: Jane Eayre Fryer



Release Date: February 21, 2017  [eBook #54216]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MARY FRANCES FIRST AID BOOK***


E-text prepared by Emmy, MWS, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by
Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 54216-h.htm or 54216-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/54216/54216-h/54216-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/54216/54216-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/maryfrancesfirst00fryeiala


Transcriber’s note:

      Please be advised that this First Aid book is very old and
      its advice and practices should not be taken as the best
      modern, safe choice.





THE MARY FRANCES FIRST AID BOOK


[Illustration: MARY FRANCES PUTS HER FIRST AID KNOWLEDGE INTO PRACTICE]


THE MARY FRANCES FIRST AID BOOK

With Ready Reference List of Ordinary
Accidents and Illnesses, and Approved
Home Remedies

by

JANE EAYRE FRYER

Member American Red Cross Society,
Member New Jersey Women’s Division National
Preparedness Association,
Author of “The Mary Frances Story-Instruction Books.”

Illustrations by Jane Allen Boyer


[Illustration: THE MARY FRANCES STORY INSTRUCTIVE HAND BOOK SERIES]




PREPAREDNESS


THIS book is for every boy and girl who hopes to render first-aid to
the sick or injured—in time of peace—in time of war—at all times in the
service of

                         OUR COUNTRY




PREFACE


THIS book is more than a story to inspire children with a desire to
relieve suffering; it is a simplified and handy reference book, telling
what to do in cases of accident or illness. In no sense is it intended
to take the place of the physician. The first principle of first-aid
cannot too often be repeated—_when in doubt, send for the doctor_.

Especial thanks are due to E. A. Y. Schellenger, M.D., member Surgical
Staff, Cooper Hospital, Camden, N. J., for his great assistance in
verifying and revising the medical and first-aid instructions given
herein; and to Constance Cooper Crichton, Instructor of First Aid
Classes, New Jersey Women’s Division National Preparedness, whose
helpful criticism and suggestions have been invaluable.

                                [Illustration: Jane Eayre Fryer]

MERCHANTVILLE, N. J.




CONTENTS


    CHAPTER                                          PAGE
        I. OFF TO MEXICO                               17
       II. THE SPEEDERS’ ACCIDENT                      21
      III. FIRST AID TO THE INJURED                    26
       IV. AT THE DOLLS’ HOSPITAL                      30
        V. THE REAL CROSS NURSES                       35
       VI. LESSONS IN FIRST AID                        39
      VII. SAFETY FIRST                                43
     VIII. PRACTICE GAMES                              50
       IX. THE HIKERS                                  53
        X. ON LOOKING GLASS LAKE                       60
       XI. TWO BOYS ARE LATE                           67
      XII. PLANS                                       73
     XIII. A SANE FOURTH OF JULY                       81
      XIV. SHESA, A RED CROSS NURSE                    88
       XV. A TELEGRAM FROM MEXICO                      94
      XVI. PRIVATE BRAVE’S ADVENTURES                  97
     XVII. THE MAD DOG                                102
    XVIII. THE POISONED BABY                          105
      XIX. HURRAH FOR OUR HERO                        108


    APPENDIX

    A READY REFERENCE LIST OF ORDINARY ACCIDENTS
      AND ILLNESSES, WITH APPROVED HOME REMEDIES      115




INSTRUCTIONS

WHAT TO DO UNTIL THE DOCTOR COMES, IN ORDINARY HOUSEHOLD EMERGENCIES
(See Ready Reference List)


                                                     PAGE
    BILIOUSNESS                                       117
    BITES OF ANIMALS                                  117
    BITES OF INSECTS                                  117
    “BLACK EYE”                                       117
    BLEEDING OF GUMS                                  117
    BLOOD BLISTERS                                    118
    BROKEN BONES OR FRACTURES                         118
    BRUISES OR CONTUSIONS                             118
    BURNS AND SCALDS                                  119
    CAR SICKNESS                                      120
    CHILBLAINS                                        120
    CHILLS                                            120
    CHOKING                                           120
    COAL GAS, SUFFOCATION FROM                        120
    COLDS                                             120
    COLIC                                             121
    CONVULSIONS OF CHILDREN                           122
    CORNS                                             122
    CROUP                                             122
    CUTS (SLIGHT)                                     122
    DIARRHEA                                          123
    EARACHE                                           123
    FAINTING                                          123
    FEVER BLISTERS (COLD SORES)                       124
    FIRE, TO AVOID ACCIDENTS FROM                      48
    FITS                                              124
    FOREIGN BODY IN EAR                               124
    FOREIGN BODY IN EYE                               125
    FROST BITES                                       125
    GUM BOILS (“CANKER SPOTS”)                        125
    HEAT EXHAUSTION                                   125
    HEMORRHAGE (SEVERE BLEEDING)                      125
    HICCOUGH                                          127
    HIVES                                             127
    INDIGESTION                                       127
    ITCHING                                           127
    LICE IN HAIR (PEDICULOSIS)                        127
    NAILS (INGROWING)                                 127
    NAUSEA (SICK STOMACH)                             128
    NOSEBLEED                                         128
    PERSPIRATION                                      128
    POISON IVY RASH                                   128
    POISONING—TREATMENTS AND ANTIDOTES                128
    POWDER WOUNDS                                     130
    PRICKLY HEAT                                      130
    PTOMAINE POISONING                                130
    SEA-SICKNESS                                      130
    SHOCK                                             131
    SORE THROAT                                       131
    SPLINTERS                                         131
    SPRAIN                                            131
    STIFF NECK                                        131
    STINGS                                            132
    STRAIN OF MUSCLES                                 132
    SUNBURN                                           132
    SUNSTROKE                                         132
    TOOTHACHE                                         132
    WARTS                                             133
    WOUNDS                                            133
    PLASTERS, POULTICES AND STUPES                    134
    HOW TO RID A HOUSE OF FLEAS                        56
    HOW TO USE FIRST AID BANDAGES      82, 83, 84, 98, 99
    HOW TO MAKE A DRINKING CUP                         42


    LIST OF REMEDIES FOR THE HOME MEDICINE CLOSET     136

[Illustration: CHARACTERS

HOSPITAL STAFF

    DOCTOR
    SURECURE
    _Resident Physician_

    MISS
    BOSSEM
    _Head Nurse_

    MISS HELPEM
    (Mary Frances)
    _Assistant Nurse_

    DOCTOR
    QUICKENQUACK
    _Interne Physician_

POLICE OFFICERS

    OFFICER ARRESTEM
    _Chief of Police_

    OFFICER MCSTOPPEM
    _Assistant Chief of Police_]

[Illustration: PATIENTS

    HESA BRAVE
    _Private Brave’s Father_

    MRS. BRAVE
    _Private Brave’s Mother_

    IMA BRAVE
    _Private Brave
    U. S. Army_

    SOAMI BRAVE
    _Private Brave’s
    Little Sister_

    IBEE BRAVE
    _Private Brave’s
    Little Brother_

    SHESA BRAVE
    _Private Brave’s
    Big Sister_]




CHAPTER I

OFF TO MEXICO


THE Head Nurse, Miss Bossem, rushed out of the Dolls’ Hospital toward
the children. “You’re late, Miss Helpem,” she called to Mary Frances.
“Go right on duty rolling bandages for the soldiers who start for
Mexico to-day. The troop-train leaves at two-thirty. Hurry, now, or you
won’t get them to the station on time.”

Then, turning to Billy, “Get the ambulance ready immediately,” she
commanded, and Billy disappeared into the garage.

       *       *       *       *       *

You see, Mary Frances finished the course in First Aid Nursing with the
Red Cross Preparedness Class just before her birthday. Being very proud
of her newly acquired knowledge, she wanted to show Billy how much she
had learned.

When Billy promised her any favor she could think of as a birthday
present, Mary Frances joyfully asked him to spend a whole day at the
Dolls’ Hospital in the playroom, pretending they were little kiddies
again—that she was Miss Helpem, the assistant nurse, and that Billy was
the ambulance driver. To keep his promise, Billy consented.

Just as they stepped into the playroom door, they seemed to grow
smaller and smaller, until they were no bigger than the dolls
themselves.

Now, go on with the story and see what happened.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: “ALWAYS CARRY THIS WITH YOU”]

Promptly at two-fifteen, Miss Helpem arrived at the station with an
ambulance full of bandages, and just in time to see the Brave family
bidding good-bye to Private Ima Brave. All the family were there, even
Michael, the big bulldog. Private Brave was among the last of the
soldiers to board the little train.

“You’ll write from New York, dear,” begged his mother, kissing him for
the twentieth time, and slipping a little American Red Cross first-aid
outfit in his hand. “Always carry this with you, and remember how your
mother loves you.”

“And you’ll send me picture postcards from everywhere, won’t you?”
begged little Ibee Brave, standing on tip-toe to get a better view of
his tall, straight brother.

“There’s a speck of dust on your uniform,” fussed Soami, his little
sister, as she brushed him with her handkerchief.

Private Brave smiled. “We’re not on dress parade, little sister,” he
said. “It’s good that khaki doesn’t show the dust, for it’s a dusty
country we’re going to.”

“‘It’s a long, long way to Mexico, it’s a long way to go,’” began
little Ibee; but at that moment the engine whistled, and his father
clasped Private Brave’s hand.

“I am proud of my son,” was all he said.

“And I, of my brother,” Shesa, his big sister, added, with tears in her
eyes.

One more whistle, and the little train started down the playroom
railroad track.

“We’ll bring the limousine nearer the station,” said Mr. Brave, taking
Mrs. Brave’s arm and walking away.

“Father and Mother don’t want anyone to talk with them just now,” said
Shesa.

“I don’t see why. Gee, I wish I was big enough to go,” said little
Ibee, as he watched the train until the last car turned a curve in the
track.

“You’d make a fine soldier, wouldn’t you,” laughed Soami, “when you’re
afraid to go upstairs in the dark.”

“Only sometimes,” answered Ibee; “only when the wind blows hard and
when it’s not moonlight—and then, not often.”

“Why, Soami, Ibee is real brave,” said Shesa. “Don’t you remember how
you were afraid to go down cellar to get some jam last night and Ibee
would have gone, if father hadn’t made you go?”

“Yes, and father stood on the landing the whole time you were gone,
too, Miss,” declared Ibee triumphantly.

“Yes, that’s so,” acknowledged Soami. “I guess Ibee would make a good
soldier—especially a drummer boy. My! he can drum bravely! Did you hear
him yesterday, Shesa?”

[Illustration: “MY! HE CAN DRUM BRAVELY!”]

“Indeed I did,” laughed the sister.

“Yes,” continued Soami, mischievously, “don’t you remember the verses
about—

    ‘A little man bought him a big bass drum,
          Boom-tid-dee-ah-da-boom!
    “Who knows,” said he, “When a war might come?
          Boom-tid-dee-ah-da-boom!
    I’m not at all frightened you understand,
    But if I am called to fight for my land,
    I want to be ready to play in the band.
          Boom-tid-dee-ah-da-boom!’”

“Come, children,” said their father, driving up, “here’s the car. Hop
in.”




CHAPTER II

THE SPEEDERS’ ACCIDENT


THE shrill sound of a policeman’s whistle cut the air three times, but
the dollsmobile sped on faster than ever.

“I couldn’t catch them at all, at all,” reported the little thin
sub-officer, McStoppem, at headquarters.

“Bring my motorcycle, McStoppem,” ordered Chief Arrestem.

“All right, sir,” nodded Officer McStoppem, bringing out the wonderful
little toy. “If you take the cross-cut road toward Sandpile Village,
you’ll catch them. The number is—here it is, I wrote it down—1492. You
can easily remember it—the year Columbus made ‘preparedness’ necessary.”

“Cut out your chatter, McStoppem, and follow me in a hurry,” directed
the chief, as he kicked the pedal of the motorcycle to start the
engine. “Hand me the paper,” and, snatching it, was off.

“The chief’ll get ’em O.K.,” muttered Officer McStoppem to himself, as
he watched the long line of dust and smoke in the wake of the little
motorcycle.

       *       *       *       *       *

Just as Chief Arrestem came into the cross-roads leading to Sandpile
Village, the runaway automobile flew past.

“By Jiminy, I don’t wonder McStoppem couldn’t catch them,” he said
under his breath, as he put on still more speed. “That man’s lost
control of his car, and unless I’m mistaken there’ll be an accident
when he comes to that dangerous turn in the road where that big rocking
chair stands.”

[Illustration: “OH, THE ENGINE’S ON FIRE!”]

Meanwhile everybody in the dollsmobile was trying not to be frightened.

“Can’t you slow down a little, Father?” asked Mrs. Brave.

“The brakes won’t hold,” panted Mr. Brave, forcing both brakes on with
all his might. “This is dreadful!”

“Gee whiz!” exclaimed little Ibee, looking out the rear window. “Here
comes the motor police. He’ll arrest us for speeding.”

“Oh, mercy, we’re coming to Rocking Hill road,” gasped Shesa. “Father,
do turn off the power!”

But Shesa spoke too late, and kerr-smash! kerr-bang! kerr-plunk! went
the dollsmobile right into the rockers of the rocking chair, turning
“turtle” twice, and breaking the beautiful glass windows to pieces.
Out of the broken radiator the boiling hot water poured over poor Mrs.
Brave’s arm where she lay just as she was thrown.

“Oh, the engine’s on fire!” shrieked little Soami, “and I’m burning to
death!”

“Father, Father,” called little Ibee, “come get me out! I’m fast under
the car! Come get me out, please! Oh, I’ll be burned to death! Father,
oh, my arm hurts! Oh, I can’t move my arm!”

The mother managed to get up when she heard the children call.

“Where’s your father? Oh, where is he?” she cried, and going to the
other side of the car, she saw poor Mr. Brave lying amidst a heap of
broken glass and wheels and gears. From his head ran a little stream of
blood.

“Oh, he’s dead!” she sobbed, but just then he gave a little groan. “Oh,
my dear husband,” she exclaimed, “tell me you’re not dead! Tell me
you’re not dead!” she begged, unmindful of her own arm.

“I’m dead, Mother,” groaned little Soami. “I just know I’m dead with
pain.”

“Well, I’m not!” said little Ibee, “and even though my arm hurts so,
I’m going to try to go for help if I can get out from under this car.”

[Illustration: UP CAME CHIEF ARRESTEM]

“My, that’s so!” exclaimed the mother. “I myself forgot to be brave.
I’ll go for help.”

But just as she spoke, up came Chief Arrestem.

“I saw it all, madam,” he said, “and I stopped to telephone to the
hospital for the ambulance.”

“Oh, don’t ’rest us, please,” begged little Ibee. “Please, Mr. Officer,
don’t arrest us. We weren’t speeding. Father couldn’t make the brakes
hold!”

“Don’t you worry, little chap,” replied Chief Arrestem. “I won’t arrest
any of you. Here comes Officer McStoppem on his motorcycle, just as I
told him to, and in a minute we’ll have you all out from under.”

“Never mind about me,” said Ibee. “Please get poor Soami out. She’s
dead, I think.”

“Quick, McStoppem,” called the chief, “help throw sand on this car to
put out the fire!”

It took about ten seconds for the two officers to put the fire out, and
even before that, they heard the honk! honk! of the ambulance.

“Here comes the ambulance!” cried Chief Arrestem. “Now, with the
driver’s help, we’ll soon be able to lift this car.”




CHAPTER III

FIRST AID TO THE INJURED


“NOW, all at once,” directed Chief Arrestem. “One, two, three!” and the
two officers and the two ambulance men lifted the dollsmobile high up
over to the other side of the road.

“Well, friends,” said Officer Arrestem, “if there’s nothing more we can
do, we’ll return to our duty.”

“Nothing more, thank you,” the head nurse answered.

The driver had quickly smothered the flames of little Soami’s frock by
using the automobile robes.

“Oh, my goodness!” shrieked Mrs. Brave, “where’s Shesa? I wonder where
my dear daughter is! Where is she? Where can she be?” she kept on
asking, crying hysterically.

[Illustration: SMOTHERED THE FLAMES OF LITTLE SOAMI’S FROCK]

“Hush! quiet yourself!” commanded the assistant nurse, who came in the
ambulance. “We found your daughter a few moments ago where she was
thrown. She had fainted, but she is all right now.”

“Oh, sit her up; don’t let her lie there!” exclaimed the mother.

“Indeed, you must keep quiet,” said the nurse, “or we cannot do
anything for anybody. It is better for her to lie down than to sit up.”

“I’d keep quiet if I knew what to do! Every woman and man, too, ought
to know.”

[Illustration: THEY ATTENDED THE MOST DANGEROUSLY INJURED FIRST]

“Yes,” replied the nurse, “every person ought to know something
about first aid to the injured.” She and the other nurse were busily
directing the orderly and driver of the ambulance in every movement,
giving them explicit directions.

They attended the most dangerously injured first, stopping the bleeding
(hemorrhage) of Mr. Brave’s head and bandaging a dressing in place.
They applied soothing carron oil to the burns on little Soami’s arms
and legs.

They bandaged temporary splints to little Ibee’s broken arm, and,
since Mrs. Brave’s scalds were not serious, they attended her last.

Under Mr. Brave’s broken leg they placed pillows to make him more
comfortable.

“If I’d only remembered to turn off the power this never would have
happened,” he muttered. “How foolish of me!”

“There would never be any accidents to speak of,” said the assistant
nurse, soothingly, “if everybody did everything right, you know.”

“If everybody just kept his head cool,” said Mr. Brave, as he tried to
move his position, but fell back with a groan.

“Give him a half-teaspoon of aromatic spirit of ammonia, Miss Helpem,”
said Miss Bossem, who was engaged in spreading the stretcher.

“Now, everyone ready to lift this patient,” she directed, as she and
the driver and orderly knelt on one knee beside Shesa, and Miss Helpem
took her position on the opposite side of the stretcher. As the three
lifted Shesa, Miss Helpem carefully held the stretcher in place, and
afterward helped carry the patient to the ambulance. Next they carried
the two children, using a stretcher for little Ibee, and making a
two-handed seat for Soami. (A “sedan chair,” you know—the kind you play
with at school.)

“I’m sorry neither doctor could leave the operating room to come, Miss
Helpem,” remarked Miss Bossem, to her assistant, who was Mary Frances,
you remember. “If you will wait here with these two patients,” (they
were Mrs. and Mr. Brave) “I will return with either Doctor Surecure or
Doctor Quickenquack.”

“Oh, why can’t you take my dear husband along?” begged Mrs. Brave.
“He’s awfully hurt! awfully!”

“Please explain to her, Miss Helpem,” said Miss Bossem, getting into
the ambulance, “that it is far better to wait for the doctor to attend
a broken leg than to attempt to place it in splints—unless it is
absolutely necessary to move the patient.”

Miss Helpem turned to Mrs. Brave, who was by this time quite exhausted,
and after explaining the situation, treated her, as she had all the
others, for—


SHOCK

_Cause:_

    A severe injury, or even the sight of one, will often
    cause intense nervousness, which is very weakening.
    This is especially true if the patient is suffering
    from severe bleeding. _Check the bleeding before
    treating for shock._

    Shock differs from fainting. The patient’s face becomes
    pale and the skin cold, the pupils of the eyes large.

_What to do:_

    1. Send for the doctor.

    2. Place patient on back with head low to allow plenty
    of blood to enter head.

    3. Give hot water or hot coffee, or one-half
    teaspoonful aromatic spirit of ammonia in a quarter of
    a tumbler of water.

    4. Hold smelling salts to the nose.

    5. Do not excite by trying to remove clothing unless
    absolutely necessary, but keep patient warm by use of
    hot-water bottles and blankets, etc.

    6. Cover patient. Rub limbs toward body.

    7. Do _not_ give whiskey or any other form of alcohol,
    if any other stimulant can be found—and _never whiskey_
    in case of _hemorrhage_ (severe bleeding).




CHAPTER IV

AT THE DOLLS’ HOSPITAL


IN a short time Mrs. Brave began to feel better, and, by the time the
ambulance returned, was able to stir about.

“Let us have a look at this broken leg,” said Doctor Quickenquack,
examining Mr. Brave. “Ahem! I think, Miss Bossem, after all, we would
better use—


FIRST-AID TREATMENT FOR BROKEN LEG

(_See Reference List_)

    Place pillows under the leg to make it more
    comfortable, but do not move the patient before the
    doctor comes, unless absolutely necessary. If necessary
    to move, place a board or an umbrella, one on each
    side of the leg, and tie in place, (or tie both legs
    together if it seems advisable) using bands of muslin,
    handkerchiefs, or[A]triangular bandages.

“After we have Mr. Brave in the hospital, we’ll put that leg in the
right kind of splints and bandages,” remarked the doctor, as he and
the driver and orderly placed him on the stretcher. “You’ll be running
a race like a boy in a few weeks,” he continued encouragingly as he
seated himself beside the patient in the ambulance, and the nurse
helped Mrs. Brave to a place.

“Like a tortoise, I’m thinking,” said Mr. Brave, trying to joke above
the pain, for oh, how his broken leg did ache.

[Illustration: HIS MOTHER WAS SITTING BESIDE THE BED]

Clang! clang! clang—clang! sounded the ambulance gong, and in less than
a few minutes they were at the Dolls’ Hospital.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next, morning little Ibee came into his father’s room, where his
mother was sitting beside the bed with her scalded arm nicely dressed
and bandaged.

“I’m going to be a doctor,” he announced proudly, after bidding his
parents good-morning. “This is a dandy place! There aren’t any private
rooms for Soami or me, so we’re each in a ward, and there’s a fellow
in the men’s ward all done up in bandages. I just wish you could see
him! I got Doctor Quickenquack to tell me what kinds they all were
and I can’t remember all of them, but I know he said something about
triangular and spiral and figure-of-eight bandages. My, that fellow
looks fine! He has a broken arm and a broken leg and a dislocated
shoulder and a fractured jaw, and his bandages are swell! He did the
whole thing by sliding off his barn roof last Sunday when he was
putting shingles on it. He says it’s a judgment—whatever that is.”

“Well, for pity’s sake,” exclaimed his mother, “Ibee, how you talk! Do
take a breath!”

“Hello, everybody!” said little Soami, running in. “How’s father?
Shesa’s fine, Miss Helpem told me. No bones broken except one finger.
Shesa’s asleep now, and her finger’s bandaged beautifully!”

“Father’s just about as well as can be expected, dear,” answered their
father. “And very thankful none of us are hurt worse.”

“I don’t know,” said Ibee, shaking his head. “Even though my arm aches
so, I’d have liked to have had something worth while; for instance, a
compound fracture of the thigh. Father’s was only a simple fracture.
In a compound fracture the broken bone often comes through the skin, I
heard the head nurse say to one of the assistants.”

“Well, sir,” said his father, “if you had this, you’d find it was
enough!”

“Why, what’s the matter with the boy? Is he crazy?” exclaimed his
mother. “As though we hadn’t all had trouble enough!”

“I don’t think he’s crazy,” said Soami. “There’s a girl in our ward who
has a broken nose, and it looks too interesting for anything to see
the nurse dress it! I want to be a nurse when I grow up! Just think
how many people one can help! Why, if it hadn’t been for the nurses,
perhaps we might—nearly all be dead!”

“Indeed we might,” agreed their mother. “I don’t know whether you’ll
be a doctor, Ibee, or whether Soami will be a nurse, but I do know
that I’m going to ask Miss Bossem if a class cannot be formed in our
neighborhood in which we can all learn how to render first-aid to the
injured.”

“Good for you, Mother,” said Shesa, coming in at that moment, and
kissing her father. “I’ve just been talking with Miss Helpem, and she
has explained how to join the Preparedness Movement, so that if we
should have war right in our own land, or serious accidents, we could
help care for the wounded or injured.”

“That brings my dear Ima to mind. Oh, I do hope we’ll get a letter
to-day,” said her mother.

“Here’s a postcard just received for Master Ibee Brave,” said a nurse,
coming along with the mail.

[Illustration: “READ IT OUT LOUD!”]

“From Ima!” said Ibee. “It’s from New York,” looking at the postmark.

“Read it out loud!” cried his mother. “Let us all hear how the dear boy
is.”

Ibee read:

    _Dear Folks:_

    _New York never looked better to us than as we left for
    the front—but who wouldn’t be brave for the sake of the
    red, white and blue? Will write mother a long letter as
    soon as time permits._

    _As ever,
    Ima Brave._

“Now, isn’t that brave?” exclaimed his mother. “He’s as brave as Teddy
Roosevelt!”

“It’s wonderful to belong to such a brave family,” said Miss Helpem,
who came in just then to renew the dressing on Mr. Brave’s head.

FOOTNOTES:

[A] Triangular bandages are described in Chapter XIII.




CHAPTER V

THE REAL CROSS NURSES


“COME,” she added, “this excitement will never do for Mr. Brave.
Everybody leave the room, and everybody go to bed and take a nap.”

“I don’t want to,” began Ibee. “I want—” but at that moment, Miss
Bossem, who was passing, came into the room.

“Why, what does this mean?” she asked crisply, gazing around. “How does
it happen, Miss Helpem, that all these people are in the invalid’s
room? Everyone who comes in must have permission.”

“Well, I am surprised!” exclaimed Mrs. Brave. “As though I’d have to
ask permission!”

“Well,” replied Miss Bossem, in a very decided manner, “everybody who
stays in this hospital must obey the rules. Miss Helpem, will you
kindly see that the children are put to bed, and I will take Mrs. Brave
to her room.”

“I’m no child,” began Mrs. Brave, “I’m an older woman than you, and
I’ve had——”

“Do you intend to risk your husband’s life any further?” asked Miss
Bossem, lifting her eyebrows and speaking in a low, icy tone.

“Poor wife—” began Mr. Brave.

“See!” said Miss Bossem. “He’s already too excited to rest tonight
without some medicine.”

“Oh, dear,” whispered Mrs. Brave, “I’m so sorry!” Then aloud: “Miss
Nurse, I’m real tired. I think I need a nap. Good-bye, dear, I’m going
to my room—you take a nap, too.”

“Well,” said Miss Bossem to Miss Helpem, “I did succeed in making Mrs.
Brave see how dangerous it was to excite the patient, but my, I don’t
like to be so cross!”

[Illustration: “WHY, WHAT DOES THIS MEAN?”]

“I just had to be firm with the children, too,” replied the assistant
nurse. “But Shesa’s a dear, and has extraordinary good sense. She is
going to form a class in Red Cross first-aid work.”

“Yes, and we’ll give the instructions,” said Miss Bossem; “that is, if
you are willing.”

“Of course,” answered Miss Helpem, “but what I meant to tell you is
that Miss Shesa is going to form a class for children.”

“What a lovely idea!” exclaimed Miss Bossem, passing on into the clinic.

       *       *       *       *       *

“Doctor, I’m getting quite tired of being here,” complained little Ibee
to Doctor Surecure, when he met him in the corridor one day about three
weeks later. “Of course it’s dandy to see so many banged-up people, but
I’m nearly well. My arm aches only on rainy days, and I can wiggle my
fingers fine.”

[Illustration: “CAN’T I GO, TOO, DOCTOR?”]

“Good,” smiled the doctor. “I’m thinking myself that we’ll be parting
with some of the Brave family soon. Your mother and sisters are to
leave us Saturday.”

“Can’t I go, too, Doctor? Can’t I?” begged the little boy.

“Why, that’s a pretty way to talk,” replied the doctor. “Don’t you like
us?”

“Oh, sure,” said Ibee, “but the fellows miss me a lot, you know.”

“Why, what will your poor father do without any of you?” teased Doctor
Quickenquack, who happened to be passing.

“Oh, I’ll come see him every day,” said Ibee. “He’ll love to hear all
about home. Can’t I go?”

“We’ll think it over,” said Doctor Quickenquack.

“And if we do decide to let you go,” added Doctor Surecure, “you must
promise not to try to take off your bandage.”

“Oh, I promise,” said Ibee. “Doctor Quickenquack said that if I let
my arm be in it long enough, I’d be able to play baseball again: and
besides, I want to show it to the fellows.”

“But you’ll not pitch ball for some time to come, young man,” laughed
the doctor.

So Mrs. Brave and the children were soon in their own home, leaving
poor Mr. Brave in the hospital. By the time Mr. Brave was able to
return, walking with a crutch, they had formed three first-aid classes.
Mrs. Brave’s was for grown-up ladies, and of this Shesa was a member.
Shesa herself, with Soami and Ibee’s help, had formed two others; one
for Boy Scouts, and one for Camp Fire Girls.




CHAPTER VI

LESSONS IN FIRST AID


“MISS HELPEM,” said the head nurse to her assistant, “how would it be
for you to take charge of Miss Brave’s children’s classes, with her
help, of course? If you think well of that arrangement, I will take the
adult class, and leave the children’s instructions to you.”

“Nothing could please me better, Miss Bossem,” answered Mary Frances (I
mean, Miss Helpem). “I dearly love dolls—oh, I meant to say, children.”

Miss Bossem laughed. “Perhaps you’ll grow up some day,” she teased.

       *       *       *       *       *

“How would you like to assist me with the children’s lessons?”

[Illustration: MISS HELPEM WAS TALKING WITH SHESA BRAVE]

Miss Helpem was talking with Shesa Brave.

“Oh, do you really think I would be able to do that?” asked Shesa,
delighted.

“Yes,” answered the nurse, “Miss Bossem and I feel quite certain you
can be a great help in showing the boys and girls what you learn in the
women’s class.”

“I never felt so proud in my life!” declared the young girl, hugging
her first-aid kit close in her arms.

       *       *       *       *       *

So it came about that when Mary Frances’ dolls gathered together for
their lessons, it was Mary Frances herself dressed in the spotless
white uniform, with the red cross on the arm and cap, of the American
Red Cross Society, who gave their—


FIRST LESSON IN FIRST AID TO THE INJURED

“Good morning, children,” she began. “We will imagine all kinds of
troubles and accidents this morning, and we will not be a bit gloomy
over them, for our thoughts will all be on how we can help the sick and
hurt people.”

“Please, Miss Helpem, can’t I be the soldier?” begged Ibee Brave.

“And can’t I pretend to drive the field ambulance?” asked little Jack.

“And can’t I be run over?” asked another boy.

[Illustration: “PLEASE, MISS HELPEM, CAN’T I BE THE SOLDIER?”]

“Mercy, children,” exclaimed the nurse, “please wait for an
explanation—and in the next lesson, I’ll assign you all something to
do. Now, ready with your note-books and pencils to take down the list
of articles needed for the medicine closet. You will learn what they
are to be used for later. Keep the list and show it to your parents
when you get home. Now write as I dictate:


MEDICINE CLOSET

    In every home there should be a certain closet or
    shelf high above _little_ children’s reach, where the
    medicines and articles needed in emergencies are kept.
    Among these should be found, plainly labeled, the
    following:[B]

    1. Tincture of Iodine.
    2. Aromatic Spirit of Ammonia.
    3. Boric Acid Powder.
    4. Stearate of Zinc.
    5. Pure Alcohol.
    6. Lime Water.
    7. Carron Oil.
    8. Epsom Salt.
    9. Soda Mint and Pepsin Tablets.
    10. Baking Soda.
    11. Household Ammonia.
    12. Adhesive (Zinc Oxide) Plaster.
    13. Tube Vaseline.
    14. Capsicum Vaseline.
    15. Peroxide of Hydrogen.
    16. Castor Oil.
    17. Witch Hazel.
    18. Essence of Ginger.
    19. Syrup of Ipecac.
    20. Spirit of Camphor.
    21. Sweet Spirit of Nitre.
    22. Boric Acid Ointment.
    23. Powdered Alum.
    24. Borax.
    25. Spiced Syrup of Rhubarb.
    26. Picric Acid Gauze.
    27. Aromatic Smelling Salts.
    28. Oil of Cloves.
    29. Normal Salt Solution.
    30. Powdered Mustard.
    31. Essence of Peppermint.
    32. Tincture of Arnica.
    33. Oil of Turpentine.
    34. Aseptic Absorbent Cotton.
    35. Sterile Gauze.
    36. Triangular Bandages.
    37. Roller Bandages.
    38. Rubber Ear Syringe.
    39. Fountain Syringe.
    40. Measuring Glass.
    41. Eye Dropper.
    42. Hot Water Bottle.

The children wrote very quietly and listened attentively to what Miss
Helpem told them about being prepared for Ordinary Household Accidents,
such as cuts, burns, scalds, bruises, stings, etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

“Children,” beamed Miss Helpem as they finished writing the list, “I
never dreamed you could be so interested. Why, not one of you has been
inattentive! Now, as a reward, I shall show you how—


TO MAKE A SANITARY DRINKING CUP FROM ANY PIECE OF CLEAN PAPER

[Illustration: TO MAKE A SANITARY DRINKING CUP FROM ANY PIECE OF
PAPER]

FOOTNOTES:

[B] The full list of remedies, with explanatory notes, is given in the
Ready Reference List at the end of this book.




CHAPTER VII

SAFETY FIRST


“WE girls get our second lesson before you boys do!” declared little
Soami to her brother Ibee at the lunch table the next day.

“I bet you don’t have as much fun as we do!” answered Ibee.

“What is the next lesson about?” asked their father.

“It’s about Safety First,” replied Ibee. “I know that.”

“Yes,” agreed Soami, “but,” glancing at the clock, “I’ll be late to
class if I don’t hurry. Mother, will you excuse me?”

Her mother nodded and smiled, and Soami left hastily.

       *       *       *       *       *

“Well, girls,” began Miss Helpem, “to-day we have a more serious time,
for we’re going to learn, in Lesson II, What to Do in Case of Slight
Cuts and Pin Pricks; Slight Burns and Scalds; Frost Bites.

“Now, as you know, almost every accident could be avoided if we thought
ahead far enough; if we did not let the knife or needle slip; if we
did not allow little children to carry scalding hot water or lighted
lamps, or to play with matches; if we looked up and down the street
before crossing. Yes, almost all accidents are avoidable if we think
far enough ahead—if we think ‘Safety First.’”

Miss Helpem paused.

“All ordinary everyday accidents,” she went on, “if treated rightly,
will give but slight trouble; but if not treated rightly may bring much
suffering to the victim, and even cause ‘blood poisoning’ and death.

[Illustration: “WELL, GIRLS, TO-DAY WE HAVE A MORE SERIOUS TIME”]

“So you see how necessary it is to understand ‘What to Do.’

“Now, these serious dangers do not come from the slight accidents
themselves, but because of uncleanliness.”

Again the assistant nurse paused, and she could not help smiling at
the look of astonishment on the faces of her girl dolls.

“It is true, girls,” she continued; “cleanliness is the rarest thing in
the world, and I will tell you why: because everywhere about us, in the
dust, in the air, on our clothing, on our hands, in standing water, on
the floor, on the ground—everywhere, even though we cannot see them, are


GERMS

    These little living particles are too small to be seen
    without a microscope, but they cause more disease and
    deaths than any of the big animals you are afraid
    of—like lions or bears or tigers. They make great deep
    sores out of little cuts, and prevent wounds from
    healing. So you can readily understand how necessary
    it is to keep all materials which touch _broken_ skin
    _perfectly clean_, and they cannot be clean if touched
    by the hands. Neither is any material clean which has
    come in contact with dust.

    Understanding this, your aim will be to keep germs out
    of any wound. If you do not have a first-aid outfit,
    you should have on hand a small package of sterile
    gauze.[C] Sterile means perfectly free from germs. Any
    cloth which has been washed and ironed is quite safe,
    however, if it has not been used. You see, heat kills
    germs. Use next to the wound the surface which has been
    folded inside.

    Do not think that every germ does evil, for some germs
    are good—just as some people are bad and some are
    good. Indeed, we depend for some kinds of food upon
    the action of certain good germs. Among such foods are
    cheese and vinegar.

    The disease germs which we dread most in cases of
    wounds are the germs of blood-poisoning and lockjaw (or
    tetanus). They are everywhere about us, in standing
    water, air, dust. They cannot do a bit of harm to the
    outside of the body, if the skin is unbroken—no more
    than a fly can do to the armor of some old knight.
    But if they can enter where the skin is broken, they
    begin to do all kinds of harm, which sometimes results
    in months of suffering from “infected” wounds, and
    sometimes finally causes the patient to lose a leg or
    an arm—or perhaps to die.

“We have spent a great deal of time on the subject of _germs_,
children,” continued Miss Helpem, “because unless you really understand
how necessary cleanliness is, you may not be particular to have clean
materials.”

“And clean hands,” suggested Soami.

“Yes,” smiled the nurse, “Soami has noticed the nurses at the hospital
washing their hands for five minutes in order to have them truly clean
before attending to a dressing on a patient.”

The little girl looked around proudly upon the class.

“Can’t we begin the first-aid games now?” asked one of the group.

[Illustration: “AND CLEAN HANDS,” SUGGESTED SOAMI]

“Not yet,” the nurse shook her head. “Wait, please, until you have
learned what to do for—


SLIGHT CUTS AND PIN PRICKS

    The bleeding from a slight cut is never very severe
    and will generally stop of itself in a short time. It
    is best to let a slight cut bleed a little, as the
    bleeding carries away the germs which may have been on
    the edge of the knife or whatever caused the wound.

_Treatment:_

    Touch slight cute with tincture of iodine;[D] or with
    alcohol; or vinegar and water, half and half; or salt
    and water, a half teaspoonful of salt to a cup of water.

    Wrap with clean gauze.

    In cases of severe hemorrhage (bleeding) send
    immediately for a doctor. Stop bleeding by using
    pressure above or below wound, or by bandaging a gauze
    compress on the wound.

    Never give whiskey or alcohol in any form. It makes
    hemorrhages worse. See Reference List.


BURNS AND SCALDS

(_See Reference List_)

    Apply carron oil. See List of Medicines.

    If carron oil is not at hand, use any dressing[E] to
    cover surface to keep out the air—as lard, butter,
    olive oil—or sprinkle with baking soda, or cover with
    white of egg, or with a paste made of starch or flour
    and water. Also spread on compress[E] some of the same
    remedy that has been applied to the burn. Hold compress
    in place with a loose bandage.

    Solution of bicarbonate of soda (baking soda) made by
    dissolving as much soda as possible in hot water (about
    one teaspoonful to a cup) is particularly relieving to
    scalds. Dip cloths into this and apply to the burned
    surface. Never remove skin from blisters. If blisters
    are large, see the doctor.


HOW TO PUT OUT FLAMES

    _Caution._—If your clothing catches fire, _do not run!
    Roll_ (in a rug, if possible) _on the floor or ground!_

    In putting out fire on another person’s clothing, use
    rugs or blankets. In throwing a rug on another person,
    be careful not to allow your own clothing to catch
    fire. Let the sufferer lie down and roll. Stand in
    _back_ of the rug, and throw from the head downward.

    If in a burning building, _creep_ to the door on hands
    and knees to avoid the smoke.


TO AVOID ACCIDENTS FROM FIRE

    1. Children should not make bonfires without the aid of
    older persons.

    2. Matches should be kept out of reach of small
    children.

    3. Children should be taught to be careful of open
    fireplaces.

    4. Children should be taught to _roll_ if their
    clothing catches fire. This would save scores of lives
    in a year.

    Safety First. Look ahead! See the danger before the
    accident!


FROST BITES

    When nose, ears, hands or feet are exposed to intense
    cold they often become frost-bitten, turning purple at
    first. If frozen thoroughly, they turn waxy white; then
    no pain is felt, because the nerves are frozen.

_Treatment:_

    1. Keep patient in cold room.

    2. Do not warm frozen parts quickly. Instead, rub with
    snow or bathe with ice water until a tingling pain is
    felt; then stop.

    If frozen parts are warmed too quickly, “gangrene” may
    result, or perhaps the sudden heat may cause—


CHILBLAINS

    Chilblains are the result of too rapid warming of cold
    parts, generally feet or fingers. Sometimes for years
    after being frost-bitten, exposure to severe cold will
    produce itching and burning, and perhaps swelling and
    ulcers.

_Treatment:_

    Rub with turpentine or alcohol. The rubbing in itself
    is excellent. See doctor.

FOOTNOTES:

[C] Sterile gauze is cheesecloth which has been so treated that it is
free of germs and is very absorbent. It is sold at all drug stores. It
should be kept closely wrapped, and the surface should never be touched
with the hands before it is placed on a wound.

If you do not have sterile gauze, keep old linen or cotton cloth (which
has been _well washed and ironed_) in glass jars, which have been
boiled and dried in the air without wiping.

[D] Soldiers on active service carry iodine to be applied to wounds
immediately, if possible—to kill germs. Iodine is a poison if
swallowed, so be careful not to leave it within the reach of _small_
children.

[E] _Important Note._—_Dressings_ are everything applied to a wounded
or sore surface. A _compress_ is the dressing which is placed directly
upon the wound. It is usually made of _clean new_ gauze. A _bandage_ is
the dressing which holds the compress (or other dressings) in place.

Compresses are used to—

1. Hold medication in place. 2. Protect sore place. 3. Stop bleeding.





CHAPTER VIII

PRACTICE GAMES


“THAT is all the lecture part of to-day’s lesson,” smiled Miss Helpem.
“Now, for the practice.”

She made a gesture toward Shesa Brave, who came forward, and together
they lifted before the class the tiny medicine cabinet which Mary
Frances’ Aunt Maria had given her for her Dolls’ Hospital.

“Let me see,” said Miss Helpem. “Yes, we have everything here, I
believe. Girls, you may all come look.”

The dolls—I mean, girls—gathered around the little glass closet and
compared the labeled bottles and packages with the list given them in
the previous lesson.

They were delighted with the beautiful cleanliness of the closet—its
bright glass door and white shelves and shining enamel frame.

“Now,” continued Miss Helpem, “please divide into groups of two. That
will make five groups. We will play that one girl in each group is
the mother, and the other her child. The child has cut her hand while
slicing bread. Mothers, what will you do? What will be your first-aid
treatment?”

Mary Frances—I mean, Miss Helpem—was delighted with the girls’ answers
and with the way in which they sought out the iodine bottle, and
wrapped the supposed injury with narrow gauze.

[Illustration: WRAPPED THE SUPPOSED INJURY WITH NARROW GAUZE]

“In the next practice game, the ‘child’ acts as mother and ‘mother’ as
‘child,’” said the assistant nurse. “This time the ‘child’s’ clothing
has caught fire from a spark which snapped out of the fireplace.”

The girls laughed.

The nurse smiled. “Girls,” she said, “these games may make you feel
like laughing, but please keep in mind how serious the real accident
would be, and try to learn what to do. You will be so much better able
to live useful lives.”

You see, Mary Frances didn’t quite remember that they were only dolls.
Even so, they have served a very useful purpose if they only teach the
readers of this book some of their lessons.

“Ready, now, for practice,” said the nurse. “Girl No. 2 of each group
is to act as a little daughter whose frock has caught fire.”

The girls remembered not to run, and “pretended” to smother out the
flames.

“That was so well done,” said Miss Helpem, “that no one was severely
burned, so we’ll merely have to treat for slight burns.”

The “mother” girl from each group went to Shesa Brave for carron oil,
which she applied on gauze compresses to imaginary hurt fingers.

Then they reversed parts again, and played the “child” had frosted her
fingers. The “mother” girls rubbed the fingers with imaginary snow,
gradually restoring the circulation of the blood in the “frozen” parts.

Throughout all their fun the girls acted in a serious, purposeful
manner.

“I’m not so certain that boys would ‘play in earnest,’” said Miss
Helpem to Shesa.

“I think they would,” replied the young girl. “I’m certain Ibee is just
as interested as Soami,” which pleased the assistant nurse more than I
can tell you.




CHAPTER IX

THE HIKERS


THE assistant nurse had very little time for the next lesson in the
boys’ class, so she gave them only notes in the morning, promising the
practice games at four o’clock in the afternoon. After telling them of
this plan, she began the lesson.

“Probably you boys have never thought of the fact that the little
pipes and larger tubes which carry the blood may be broken _under_
the skin,” Miss Helpem said. “When the blood gathers in dark purplish
spots underneath the unbroken skin, you have what is called a bruise or
contusion.


BRUISES (CONTUSIONS)

(_See Reference List_)

    “Black and blue” spots which result from bleeding under
    the skin are caused by falls or blows, or pinching (as
    in door or window).

_Treatment:_

    Apply cold water or ice wrapped in a cloth, or an ice
    bag, or bathe with half water and half alcohol, or
    witch hazel, or arnica.

    If an arm or finger, hold up over the head.

    If severe, after the pain and swelling have lessened,
    use hot applications, wringing cloths out of hot water,
    changing them as they cool, or use a hot-water bag.

    For “black eye,” bathe with ice-cold water, or use
    cloths wrung out of water as hot as can be borne.

    Massage gently for discoloration.

    NOTE.—Never open a blood blister—apply hot water.


SPRAINS

(_See Reference List_)

    should be treated as soon as possible by a physician,
    but while waiting for the doctor, use _cold_ water
    applications. If cold water does not relieve the pain
    in an hour’s time, try hot water.

    Do not attempt to use the sprained joint.


STINGS AND BITES OF INSECTS

(_See Reference List_)

    For stings of bees and bites of spiders, apply any of
    the following list:

    Mud.
    Slice of onion.
    Household ammonia.
    Paste made of bicarbonate of soda (baking soda).
    Spirit of camphor.

Miss Helpem paused. “While we are thinking about insects,” she said, “I
wish to speak of—


THE FILTHY FLIES

If you could look at the bottom of a fly’s foot under the microscope,
you would see thousands of the most disgusting germs, particularly of
the dreaded typhoid fever.

Please remember that it is far more important to prevent disease than
to cure—so do all that you can to keep flies out of the house, out of
food, off the baby’s bottle and body. Just looking at this picture
shows you a little of what must go into baby’s mouth after the fly
has stolen a bit of baby’s breakfast. How many of you promise to do
everything you can to reduce the number of flies in this beautiful
country of ours—by destroying them and by removing their breeding
places, which are in _manure_ piles?”

Every boy’s hand shot up.

“Thank you,” smiled the assistant nurse. “I can see that the boys of
this class are to be real soldiers of health for this entire community.”

[Illustration: KEEP FLIES OUT OF FOOD. OFF THE BABY’S BOTTLE]

“Please, Miss Helpem,” said Ibee Brave, “there are two more animals I
would like to learn something about. One is the mosquito, and the other
is fleas.”

The boys laughed.

“Not animals, Ibee; insects,” corrected Miss Helpem. “We will not have
time to speak at length of the mosquito, for that would make a whole
lesson in itself, but I do want to say that mosquitoes are the cause
of some of our worst diseases, for they carry disease germs from one
person’s blood into another’s. To destroy them, kerosene oil should be
sprayed or sprinkled or poured on the surface of any stagnant water;
for mosquito babies (wigglers) live in stagnant (standing) water.
Please remember this: one old tin tomato can half full of water will be
an ample amount to supply a whole neighborhood with young mosquitoes in
a short time, so overturn any old tins you see, just to help in a good
cause.”

“Now, Ibee,” she continued, after a slight pause, “I will tell you


HOW TO RID A HOUSE OF FLEAS

    Dust naphtha flakes[F] all over the floors. Leave
    twenty-four hours, if possible, then sweep up and
    sprinkle the sweepings with kerosene to destroy the
    eggs before throwing away.

“I say, fellows,” sang out Ibee Brave, after the class was dismissed,
“let’s go on a hike like any good scouts. Gee, I wish I were twelve
years old, so I could be a boy scout!”

“We treat you just as if you were one. Let’s go over to the river
bank,” suggested their patrol leader. At the signal, off they started
over the hills of the sand-pile of Mary Frances’ playroom, coming at
length to Painted River and Looking Glass Lake, on which floated the
toy ducks and swans which Mary Frances’ little friend Eleanor had
given her for a Christmas present.

When they re-assembled at four o’clock, the assistant nurse was
surprised at their appearance, for several swollen faces were plastered
in blotches of mud.

[Illustration: “YOU MUST HAVE HAD GOOD TREATMENT”]

“We don’t need any practice games,” commented one of the boys.

“We have had real practical practice,” explained their leader.

“I should judge you had,” said Miss Helpem, looking over the group. “Do
tell me what happened.”

“When we left here, we started on a hike to the river,” went on the
leader, “and after we had rested a little while, we began a game of
baseball. Tom Holden was catcher, and somehow when he leaned over to
fasten his shoe, bang! the ball went into his eye—an accident, of
course.”

[Illustration: “I HELD MY FINGER IN IT”]

“At first I thought it had put my eye out,” said Tom, “but the fellows
used ‘first aid’ immediately.”

“I never saw a ‘black eye’ look better,” praised the assistant nurse.
“You must have had good treatment.”

“Next,” continued the leader, “I raised a blood blister on my finger,
splitting kindling wood for a camp fire. The fellows made some water
hot on the fire, and I held my finger in it—but if it hadn’t been that
we were ‘first aiders,’ I wouldn’t have noticed a little thing like
that.”

“And last of all,” said Ibee Brave, “I stepped into a hornets’ nest!”

“I can imagine the rest of the story,” smiled Miss Helpem. “And I can
understand why you haven’t clean faces!”

“But you can’t imagine how grand it was to know ‘what to do,’”
protested Ibee Brave through swollen lips.

“Well, boys,” said the assistant nurse, “after this day’s happenings,
I think we will not need any practice games. I’m very glad nothing
really serious occurred, and that your first-aid knowledge prevented
suffering.”

“Say, Miss Helpem, you wouldn’t mind not saying anything to the other
class about the things that happened, would you? We might just pass it
off without much explanation, you know.”

“I promise secrecy!” laughed the assistant nurse.

FOOTNOTES:

[F] May be bought at drug store, or large department store.




CHAPTER X

ON LOOKING GLASS LAKE


THE boys, however, forgot that Mary Frances’ girl dolls were Camp Fire
Girls, and “Blue Birds,” and that girls as well as boys go on hikes—and
meet with mishaps.

The mother of Soami Brave’s chum was the Guardian of their Camp Fire.
The very afternoon that the boys went hiking, she took the girls of
the first-aid class for a boat ride on Looking Glass Lake. They didn’t
happen to meet any of the boys, however.

The sun shone very brightly into the playroom window, a beam falling
radiantly upon Looking Glass Lake and reflecting brightly upon the
faces of the happy boating party.

“Isn’t this lovely!” sighed Soami, as they drifted under the shade of a
Christmas cedar tree which Mary Frances had planted on the edge of the
lake.

“Isn’t it, though!” said Angie, her little chum; “only isn’t the sun
hot, Mother!”

“It certainly is, dear,” agreed her mother. “I didn’t realize, or I
would have told you to powder your faces to prevent sunburn.”

“Why, Mother!” exclaimed Angie, “you have always disapproved of face
powder, and here you are recommending powder!”

“I know,” laughed her mother, “but I refer to toilet or talcum powder,
a coat of which might prevent sunburn. As it is now, you girls will
probably have to ask Miss Helpem’s advice.”

[Illustration: THE LITTLE PARTY SOON SCATTERED TO PICK WILD FLOWERS]

“Our class meets to-morrow morning,” said Soami. “Isn’t that good!”

By this time the little party had beached the boat on the shore and
soon scattered to pick wild flowers.

At the sound of “Wohelo,” the girls gathered for their homeward trip.

“My, how my hand and arm burn and itch,” exclaimed one of the girls,
scratching her arm.

“Oh, perhaps that is plant poison!” cried Soami. “Do you know poison
ivy when you see it?”

“No,” the girl replied. “What does it look like?”

“My big brother, Ima, explained it this way to me,” replied Soami:


POISON IVY

    This vine runs along the ground and climbs trees in
    just the same way as the beautiful Virginia Creeper.
    It is quite readily distinguished, however, for Poison
    Ivy has but _three_ leaves in a cluster, while Virginia
    Creeper has _five_ leaves.

    The poison rash is caused by the irritating juices of
    the plant.

[Illustration: “MY, HOW MY HAND AND ARM BURN AND ITCH”]

“My, I wish I’d known that when gathering my flowers,” said another
girl. “I really believe I’ve gathered some poison ivy among them.
Look, is this the ivy? It has three leaves.”

“It certainly is,” said Soami. “Please throw it overboard. You may have
a case of ivy poison ‘for fair,’ though not everybody ‘takes’ poison.
Maybe you’ll be lucky.”

“I sincerely hope so,” said the girl so fervently that everybody
laughed.

“Well, anyhow, don’t scratch!” warned the Guardian of the Fire.

But the next morning’s class hour revealed the result of the day’s
adventures. Two girls came with bad cases of plant poison, and nearly
every girl had been sunburned.

[Illustration: “IT HAS THREE LEAVES”]

“Well, well,” said the assistant nurse, when the girls told of their
experiences. “Although I’m sorry for you, this is really very
interesting, for it will make you girls see the real helpfulness of our
lessons. You can very soon relieve each other of your unpleasant skin
irritations, for I shall give you notes on what to do for—


SUNBURN

(_See Reference List_)

    Sunburn is the result of exposure to the direct or
    reflected rays of the sun, sometimes causing the skin
    to blister and peel.

_To Prevent:_

    Before exposure, spread over the face and arms, cold
    cream or any grease at hand—even cream off milk; or use
    toilet powder.

    Keep the head covered, but have _air space_ between the
    top of the hat and top of head.

_Treatment:_

    Never wash sunburn.

    Never open the blisters.

    Mix a lotion of one part limewater to three parts olive
    oil (sweet oil), and apply.

    You see, the treatment is very much the same as for
    burns.


PLANT POISONING

(_See Reference List_)

    Poison Ivy and a few other plants cause a rash upon
    the skin after contact with their irritating juices.
    Everyone should learn to distinguish poison ivy, which
    has _three_ leaves, not _five_, as has the Virginia
    Creeper (see picture in this chapter). If this
    poisonous plant were recognized and avoided, there
    would be but few cases of plant poisoning.

_Treatment:_

    Do not scratch.

    Mop on rash a saturated solution of Epsom salt, or
    boric acid, or baking soda,[G] with a small “sponge”
    of absorbent cotton, which is to be thrown away after
    using. Allow application to dry in the air.


PRICKLY HEAT

    Prickly Heat is an itching redness of the skin caused
    from overheating the body. It appears oftenest on
    babies; sometimes on older people whose skin is very
    sensitive.

_Treatment:_

    Bathe with a pure soap, as Castile.

    Then bathe with a mixture of one part alcohol to three
    parts water.

    Dust, with talcum powder.


HIVES (NETTLE RASH)

    These itching lumps, which resemble mosquito bites,
    usually indicate stomach or intestinal trouble. They
    seem to appear after exposure to first, extreme heat;
    then, to sudden chill. Sometimes they are caused by
    certain foods; as fish or berries.

_Treatment:_

    For the itching, rub with table salt.

    Give a cathartic. Citrate of magnesia is excellent.

    Then give a half-teaspoon table salt twice a day for
    two or three days.

    An old-fashioned home remedy is one-quarter teaspoonful
    cream of tartar in one-quarter glass of water three
    times a day, at morning, noon and evening, for three
    days.

    If hives persist, see doctor.

“Did you have it all planned to give us this lesson. Miss Helpem?”
asked Soami Brave, while the girls bathed their sunburned faces as
directed, and treated the poison ivy rash with the Epsom salt solution.


“Do you really want to know?” asked the assistant nurse.

“Please tell us,” they begged.

“Well, to tell the truth,” replied Miss Helpem, “your needs seemed to
require this lesson so much—that I didn’t have to invent a game at
all—I just put you into practical practice.”

“By the way, Miss Helpem,” suggested Angie, “would you mind not telling
the boys’ class about what happened?”

“I promise secrecy,” said Miss Helpem. The girls wondered why she and
Shesa Brave laughed so heartily—they didn’t know that the boys had been
given the same promise.

FOOTNOTES:

[G] TO MAKE A SATURATED SOLUTION

Stir into a small amount of boiled water, all that can be dissolved.




CHAPTER XI

TWO BOYS ARE LATE


TWO boys were absent when the class met for the next lesson.

“How disappointed I am,” said Miss Helpem. “This is the first time
anyone has missed a lesson.”

“Perhaps Tom and Jim will come late,” suggested Ibee Brave, and just as
he spoke steps were heard.

Ibee opened the door and in came the two boys. Jim was holding a
handkerchief to his nose, which was bleeding profusely.

“He didn’t want to come in,” explained Tom to the nurse, “but I told
him you could make it stop. He said he didn’t believe so, for he’d
tried everything. He kept saying he ought to lie down, and I kept
saying he ought to sit up to keep the blood from flowing so easily.”

Tom stopped to take a breath. You see he had great confidence in Miss
Helpem’s first-aid help ever since his experience with his “black eye.”

“You were right, Tom,” said Miss Helpem, showing Jim to a seat before
the class. “If you do not mind, Jim, I will give the boys their lesson
now on what to do for—


NOSEBLEED

(_See Reference List_)

    1. Sit patient upright.

    2. Raise arm on bleeding side.

    3. Wrap neck and forehead with towels dipped in _cold_
    water.

    4. Sniff ice water and salt up nostrils. One-half
    teaspoon salt to a glass of water.

    5. Place a piece of ice under the upper lip. Hold ice,
    wrapped in cloth, on the bridge of the nose.

    6. If bleeding still continues, use a small piece of
    absorbent cotton as a wedge or plug or cork. Fasten
    a thread to the cotton—to be used to remove it. Dip
    it into peroxide of hydrogen, and push gently into
    bleeding nostril with a pencil.

[Illustration: JIM WAS HOLDING A HANDKERCHIEF TO HIS NOSE]

Shesa Brave brought the articles needed as Miss Helpem worked, and in a
very few seconds after the nurse had used the cotton wedge, Jim’s nose
stopped bleeding.

It was an excellent lesson for the boys, who didn’t realize that the
next day they would only be dolls, whose noses may break, but not
bleed. Still, if you can remember what to do, those dolls will never
mind.

After Jim took his usual place Miss Helpem continued the lesson.

“Let me see,” she said, “I think, after nosebleed, perhaps the next
most common complaints are earache and toothache and a few other little
aches.

“Now, as to—


EARACHE

(_See Reference List_)

    This dreadful pain is generally caused by hardening of
    the wax in the ear from cold. _To prevent_ wax from
    hardening, use a little common _red_ (unbleached)
    vaseline in the ear.

_Treatment:_

    Hold ear over a cloth wrung out of hot water on which
    is sprinkled some pure alcohol.

    With a medicine dropper, drop into ear some warm olive
    oil; or saturate a small piece of absorbent cotton with
    the warm olive oil, and place in ear—cover with dry
    cotton.

    (Mothers often use one drop of laudanum in the olive
    oil, but laudanum is too dreadful a poison for children
    to handle.)

    For watery discharge after earache, it is best to see a
    doctor, but a sprinkling of boric acid in the ear will
    usually relieve the trouble.

    If earache recurs often, see the doctor.


FOR INSECT IN THE EAR

    Drown insect by filling ear with warm olive oil.

    (Mothers sometimes pour a little pure alcohol into the
    ear to drown and shrink insect.)


FOR “SOMETHING” IN THE EYE

    1. Wink—do not rub.

    2. Hold upper lid over under lid, and blow opposite
    nostril.

[Illustration: AN EYE-CUP]

    Remember that almost always an object in the eye will
    work itself out if the eye is kept closed.

    Wash the eye with boric acid solution in an eye-cup.[H]


TOOTHACHE

    As soon as possible see a dentist. There would be but
    little toothache if children were taken _in time_ to
    a good dentist. This applies even to _first teeth_,
    for if first teeth are neglected, the second teeth are
    affected.

_Treatment:_

    If the tooth feels long, with a throbbing pain, there
    is trouble with the nerve. Paint gum with iodine, being
    careful not to swallow any. For painting, use a small
    ball of cotton twisted or tied fast to the end of a
    toothpick. Never dip the used cotton back into the
    iodine.

    If the tooth aches, look for a cavity, clean out the
    cavity with a toothpick.

    Fill cavity with absorbent cotton wet with essence of
    peppermint or red pepper water or oil of cloves, and
    cover with dry cotton.

[Illustration: TOOTHACHE]


SPLINTERS

    Be careful not to break splinter; pull it out from
    direction in which it entered.

    If no end appears above the skin, open the skin with a
    needle, _but dip the needle into alcohol first to kill
    germs_.

    Every medicine closet should contain a splinter
    extractor or tweezers. They cost from five to ten cents.


HICCOUGH

    Hiccough is usually caused by indigestion.

_Treatment:_

    A few soda-mint tablets are generally helpful.

    Nine or more swallows of water without breathing is a
    good old-fashioned remedy. So, also, is holding a deep
    breath.

    If hiccough continues, mothers usually give children a
    cup of warm water in which is dissolved a half teaspoon
    mustard powder—to cause the child to “throw up”
    whatever is causing trouble in the stomach.

“Now, I see some of you shuddering,” laughed the nurse, “and no one
can blame you, but sometimes hiccough becomes very serious, and it is
better to take the nasty dose of mustard water than to endanger the
heart’s action from hiccoughing. But just to console you, I will give
some hints as to—


HOW TO STOP NAUSEA (SICK STOMACH)

    Cracked ice[I] held in the mouth, and allowed to melt
    slowly is excellent.

    Soda mint is good.


CHILLS

    Chills usually show that a person is going to be ill.
    See a doctor.

    Never cool off suddenly. Do not sit down in a cool,
    breezy place when in a perspiration. It is very
    dangerous and has caused many a person to “catch his
    death of cold.”

    If a person becomes chilled from exposure:

    1. Use hot-water bags (or stones or bricks, heated in
    the oven) or hot stove lids or flatirons, covered with
    paper or cloth to prevent burning the patient. Place
    them under the arms and at the feet.

    2. Rub the patient’s limbs toward the body.

    3. Give hot coffee or tea or hot lemonade.

    4. Keep well wrapped.

    5. Give a hot foot bath in which is a teaspoonful
    powdered mustard.

    6. Wrap in blanket and put to bed.


FAINTING

(_See Reference List_)

    Fainting is caused when too small an amount of blood
    flows to the head.

_To Prevent:_

Oftentimes, bending the head forward until between the knees, spreading
knees apart, prevents a person from fainting, for the blood then flows
to the head.

_To restore a person who has fainted:_

    Keep people away. Patient needs air.

    Lay patient flat on floor with no pillow, having fresh
    air in room. Fan patient.

    Loosen clothing about neck.

    Hold household ammonia or smelling salts to nose.

    Dash a little cold water in face.

    Coffee may be given after patient recovers
    consciousness.

“That is all the lesson for to-day,” said the assistant nurse, “and
you’ve all been so attentive that I would like to give you a reward.”

“I don’t think that we need any reward, Miss Helpem,” said Tom Holden,
“when you’ve done so much for us all, already. Gee, you make me feel
like being a doctor when I grow up!”

“I hope not all of you feel that way,” laughed Miss Helpem. “A doctor
in a town full of doctors would have a difficult time making a living.”

“That’s not true of first-aiders though,” said Tom.

FOOTNOTES:

[H] To use an eye-cup, fill it about three-quarters full; hold it over
the eye while bending the head forward. Throw head back, holding cup
over eye, and open and shut eye several times.

[I] An easy way to crack ice is to place a piece about the size of your
fist in a strong piece of cloth, and hammer it into bits.

To keep ice chips, lay a piece of wool flannel over a small sieve, and
place the chipped ice on this, allowing it to drain into a bowl. Wrap
the flannel over the ice. This keeps the warm air out from the ice and
the cold air in.




CHAPTER XII

PLANS


“NO firecrackers, and no toy pistols!” exclaimed Ibee Brave to his
Sister Soami, when she told him about the lesson given the girls’ class
the day before. “That’s all right for girls, but I can’t imagine boys
on the glorious Fourth without firecrackers and pistols!”

“You wait until you hear what Miss Helpem told us. Your lesson comes
this afternoon, doesn’t it? You may change your mind,” prophesied Soami.

“Pooh!” exclaimed Ibee. “I bet I don’t! What kind of a fellow would I
be, with a brother off with the troops in Mexico, if I were afraid of a
toy pistol!”

“Oh, dear me,” laughed Soami, “you don’t understand. It’s not the
pistol you ought to be afraid of; it’s——”

“Oh, say, talk sense, can’t you?” exclaimed Ibee. “What are you driving
at, anyhow?”

[Illustration: “NO FIRE CRACKERS AND NO TOY PISTOLS!”]

“That’s all for the present, class,” replied Soami, tantalizingly, as
she ran off with Angie, who had just appeared.

Ibee decided to hunt up Tom Holden before going to class, to find out
what he knew. But Tom hadn’t heard anything about the question.

“I don’t see any harm in a few proper celebrations,” said Tom. “What’s
Miss Helpem’s idea, I wonder?”

By the time the class assembled all the boys had heard something
about “Miss Helpem’s Fourth of July idea,” and there was an unusual
air of expectancy as the assistant nurse came into the class room
carrying—what do you think?—a toy pistol, a bunch of tiny firecrackers,
a bunch of medium-sized firecrackers, and some “giant cannon” crackers.
Of course, they were very tiny, just the right size for Mary Frances’
dolls. The “cannon” crackers were like the tiniest real ones you ever
saw.

Miss Helpem had just laid them all on the little glass table near the
little glass medicine closet, when Shesa Brave came in carrying a
little cannon—which would really “go off, if loaded.”

The boys certainly were surprised, for they thought they were to hear
these very toys condemned.

“Good afternoon, boys,” smiled Miss Helpem, straightening her cap.
“This is to be a very interesting lesson. It’s our Fourth of July
lesson, even though the Fourth doesn’t come until next Tuesday. I
hope we are all going to have a grand time on the Fourth. The girls’
class have planned their part in the town event. Doctor Surecure is in
charge, you know. He is planning a civic and patriotic celebration.
I shall ask Miss Shesa to read you the program. You will notice that
your space is left blank. That is, left open so that we may fill it in
to-day. Now, Shesa, read if you please.”

Shesa read the—


PROGRAM FOR FOURTH OF JULY CELEBRATION

    10.00 A. M.  Bugle Call to Village Green.
    10.05 A. M.  Music by Town Band.
    10.10 A. M.  Reading of Declaration of Independence.

By the Mayor.

    10.20 A. M.  Flag Raising. Singing: “Star Spangled Banner.”
    10.30 A. M.  Parade Assembles.
    11.00 A. M.  Parade Moves:

    1. Up Main Street.
    2. Through River Avenue.
    3. Along Lake Drive.
    4. Down Main Street to Village Green.

Order of Parade:

    1. Master of Ceremonies on Horseback.
    2. Town Council on Horseback.
    3. Hearus Band.
    4. The Red, White and Blue.
          Borne by Six Boy Scouts.
    5. The Boy Scouts.
          (Who will arrange their own program.)
    6. Float:
          Camp Fire Girls.
    7. The Spirit of ’76.
    8. Float:
          Our Veterans.
    9. Float:
          The Spirit of 1916.
    10. Floats:
        First Aiders:
            (_a_) Girls.
            (_b_) Boys.
    11. Future Citizens:
          Baby Parade.
    12. Float:
          Our Hope.
              School House, over which the Dove of Peace hovers
                with outstretched wings, just under the American
                Flag.


Decorated Dollsmobiles.

(Best to be awarded a silver cup.)

    Intermission.

    2.00 P. M.   Bugle Call to Village Green.
    2.05 P. M.   Music by Hearus Band.
                 Reading of Lincoln’s Address at Gettysburg.
                               By the Mayor.
    2.15 P. M.   (_a_) Work Horse Parade.
                 (_b_) Pony Parade.
    3.00 P. M.   Prizes Awarded.
    3.15 P. M.   Singing—“America.”
    3.30 P. M.   Races:
                   1. Sack Race.
                   2. Three-legged Race.
                        (By girls and boys.)
                   3. Hurdle Race.
                   4. Fencing Contest.
                        (Between two boys.)
                   5. Flag Drill.
                            By Boy Scouts
                                 and
                            Blue Birds.
    4.30 [P. M.]   Music—Hearus Band.
    5.00 P. M.   Regatta on Looking Glass Lake.

    In the evening, fireworks will be set off on the
    Village Green in front of Town Hall.

    Music by Hearus Band.

    _Notice to the Public._

    It will be unlawful to use firecrackers and toy pistols
    or blank cartridges.

    By order of the Town Council.

    Signed by THE MAYOR.

“Some program!” commented Tom Holden.

“But why not let us have firecrackers and toy pistols?” asked Ibee
Brave.

“Yes, Miss Helpem, why not?” asked half a dozen voices.

“I am prepared for that question,” smiled the assistant nurse. “If you
will kindly open your note-books, I think by the end of this lesson
you will understand that it is not because anyone wishes to deny you
fun that you are asked not to use these little toys,” pointing to the
table, “but because—well, after you have heard the lesson, I think you
will know something about the danger from—


GUNPOWDER WOUNDS

    Gunpowder is not antiseptically clean. It is very dirty
    because it contains so many of the deadly germs of
    lockjaw.

    This germ has such a terrible effect upon the body that
    if not destroyed in time, it causes the jaws to lock
    so tightly together that they cannot be forced open.
    Gradually the patient starves to death and finally dies
    in terrible convulsions of pain.

    Toy pistols, firecrackers, blank cartridges, being
    loaded with gunpowder are very dangerous playthings,
    and their use should be discouraged. Any physician or
    nurse will tell you that the hospitals have many deaths
    from tetanus (lockjaw) after the Fourth of July.


WHAT TO DO FOR POWDER WOUNDS

    See a doctor.

    Absolutely every wound of this character _must_ be
    treated with anti-tetanic serum.

    If doctor is not seen immediately, paint with iodine
    and anoint with vaseline; but the doctor _must_ be seen.

“We never understood the dangers before, Miss Helpem. Now, what will we
have in that parade?” spoke up the scout patrol leader.

“We need decide only about the float of the first-aiders,” said Miss
Helpem. “Your scout-master will confer with you scouts as to the other
part of the program.”

“Oh, yes,” rejoined the patrol leader; “but, Miss Helpem and Miss
Shesa, have you thought out anything for our first-aiders’ float?”

“To confess the truth,” laughed the nurse, “I think Miss Shesa has no
less than twenty ideas. Will you make a few suggestions to the boys?”
turning to her.

“Miss Helpem has more ideas in a minute than I have in an hour,” began
Shesa, “but she thought one of my ideas good. It seemed to me that you
boys might fix up an improvised first-aid tent on your float, leaving
it on the Village Green after the parade. In case any real accident
occurred, Miss Helpem could have at hand everything she needed—for
somebody might be foolish enough to get hurt. Then you could really do
a little actual service by being at her call.”

“It sounds wonderfully important,” said the patrol leader.

“Only I do wish you boys had had some lessons in bandaging,” commented
Miss Helpem. “But we’ll all do our best, anyway, and look forward with
pleasure to those lessons.”

“Why couldn’t we have a little chap all bandaged up, with that toy
cannon at his feet and a string of firecrackers and a toy pistol in his
hands, with a printed card on him saying, ‘I used these toys on the
Fourth,’ and another little perfectly well chap all dressed in bunting,
carrying a flag and holding a horn, bearing a sign, ‘I didn’t’?” asked
the patrol leader.

[Illustration: “THAT’S A FINE IDEA”]

“That’s a fine idea,” said Ibee Brave, “but where do _we_ come in?”

“We? Oh, we—” the patrol leader answered so lamely that everybody
laughed.

“I can tell you, boys, a good way to be better prepared for important
work,” said Miss Helpem. “If you are willing to take two more lessons
before the Fourth, I feel quite certain Miss Shesa will show you the
simplest first-aid bandages. She has been taking a full course in
first-aid at the hospital, you know. Then, on the float, you may adjust
bandages to each other.”

“That’s awfully kind of Miss Shesa,” said the leader. “Will all you
fellows come?”

Everybody said yes, and the class was dismissed.

“Say, I wonder what the girls are going to do,” exclaimed Tom Holden
suddenly on the way home.

“That’s so! I wonder why we didn’t ask?” said another boy.

“I’ll try to find out,” said Ibee Brave.




CHAPTER XIII

A SANE FOURTH OF JULY


“SOAMI, what are the girls going to do in the parade—on your float, I
mean?” asked Ibee, yawning sleepily, as he stretched out in a steamer
chair near the hammock in which Soami rocked on the porch of the Brave
family’s cottage.

“Just—as—though—I’d—tell—you,” yawned Soami in imitation of Ibee’s
manner.

“Say, go on, tell me, won’t you?” said Ibee. “I’ll tell you a little
about ours if you do.”

“Yum, yum,” sang Soami. “I might possibly tell you a little—you tell
first.”

“Has Shesa anything to do with your plans?” asked Ibee.

“Oh, so she’s going to give you lessons in bandaging, too!” exclaimed
Soami, realizing the next instant that she had given a secret away, but
the “cat was out of the bag.”

Then Ibee began to laugh. “Caught you this time, Sister,” he teased.
“Shesa wouldn’t give me a hint.”

“Anyhow, I think you were awful!” said Soami. “I’ll watch out for you
after this.”

“Tell me more? Please do,” begged Ibee, but Soami had gone indoors
where she felt safer.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shesa Brave taught the boys and girls so well that within the week they
were quite familiar with the use of—


TRIANGULAR BANDAGES

    Bandages cut in the form of triangles are the most
    useful first-aid bandages, for they are very readily
    adjusted, and may be applied to so many different uses;
    for instance:

    To hold dressings (compresses) in place.

    To support broken or fractured parts of the body
    (sling).

We will have on hand for our uses:

One large triangular bandage, made from a piece of unbleached muslin
one yard square.

Cut the muslin across diagonally, as shown in “A.”

Two smaller triangular bandages, made by cutting a large triangular
bandage across as in “B.”

Of course any piece of goods may be used for a bandage, even
handkerchiefs or torn clothing; but we are speaking about the best kind
of bandages to have ready for use.

    NOTE.—For triangular bandage for doll twenty-one inches
    high, cut a piece of soft muslin or lawn sixteen inches
    square. Cut across diagonally for one large triangular
    bandage. To make the small triangular bandage, cut
    across the remaining triangular piece.

Triangular bandages are used—

    1. Unfolded.
    2. Folded.

When the triangular bandage is repeatedly folded on itself it becomes
the “cravat” bandage.

The triangular bandage, either unfolded or folded, may be used on any
part of the body. The smaller triangles are used for the hands and feet
and the jaw.

NOTE.—In the ready-made first-aid packets will be found a triangular
bandage, on which are printed sketches of the manner in which the
bandage is applied.

[Illustration: TRIANGULAR BANDAGES]

[Illustration: TRIANGULAR BANDAGES]

You may see how these bandages are used by looking at the picture
(page 83) of Rose Mary, Mary Frances’ big dolly, which she bandaged so
skilfully that all her friends felt certain that she had been taught
by fairy teachers.

[Illustration: THE GIRLS APPEARED READY FOR THE PARADE]

If you practice putting these kinds of bandages on your dolls perhaps
you will be able some day to help somebody who gets hurt, and seem
yourself like a fairy to the person whose pain you helped.

The children became so enthusiastic in practising the various methods
of bandaging that it grew to be quite a joke in their homes. Many
times they waylaid the various members of their families, whom they
wouldn’t let go until they were bandaged to look like heroes from the
battlefield.

The boys tried in vain to find out what the girls’ class had planned
for their Fourth of July “float.” They taxed their brains guessing, but
no one was more surprised than they when the girls appeared ready for
the parade, all dressed in nurses’ outfits, decorated with a red cross,
each carrying a big doll, bandaged, head, hand, arm, foot, in first-aid
triangular bandages. In the center of the group, Mike, the Brave
family’s pet bulldog, was comfortably perched, swathed in bandages.
Mike wore a large placard which read:

“See what fire crackers and toy pistols may do to you!”

He seemed to enjoy this particular Fourth, however, more than any other
the Brave family could remember.

The boys did have three “real cases” for their first-aid hospital tent.

A very foolish youth, notwithstanding the Mayor’s warning, shot off
blank cartridges from a revolver, frightening a horse nearby, which
broke its halter and ran away, throwing the young man down so hard that
he had to be taken to the first-aid tent with a broken arm.

Ibee Brave and Tom Holden happened to be near, and were very proud as
they bore the sufferer to the improvised hospital.

They hadn’t noticed in their excitement that a little boy had been
wounded with the powder from the shot, and felt mortified when two
members of the girls’ class followed them into the tent with the little
patient.

Miss Helpem sent for Doctor Quickenquack, who set the big boy’s broken
arm and treated the little fellow’s powder wounds.

“The worst of it is, young man,” said the doctor to the big boy, as he
set the arm, “that not all the punishment came to yourself. If these
powder wounds become serious for that youngster, you will be blamed.”

“I didn’t realize, Doctor,” replied the young man. “I’ll never need any
further lesson—after all this, and after I pay my fine.”

The other “case” was a lady who fainted when she saw the accident, and
was quickly revived in the tent.

“I really believe that this is the best Fourth of July celebration our
town has ever known, Doctor,” said the Mayor, complimenting Doctor
Surecure upon the success of the day. “‘A sane Fourth’ as you said,
will give more pleasure, if people will co-operate, than all the din of
firecrackers and thunder of powder. I’m sure we owe you and your able
first-aid classes our vote of thanks.”

“Miss Helpem deserves all the credit for the first-aid help,” replied
the doctor.

“Indeed no, thank you, Doctor,” laughed Mary Frances Helpem, coming
up at that moment. “To the boys and girls of the classes belongs that
praise.”




CHAPTER XIV

SHESA, A RED CROSS NURSE


“WHAT do you hear from your brother, Shesa?” asked Miss Bossem of
Shesa Brave a few days later, as she was leaving the advanced class in
first-aid.

The young girl looked troubled. “We haven’t heard a word for nearly
five weeks,” she replied. “I have been thinking seriously of going to
the front as a volunteer nurse, hoping I may be able to get news of
Ima.”

“That seems like an excellent idea to me,” said the head nurse. “You,
being a member of the American Red Cross Society, can manage very
nicely, I think.”

So, within a week, Shesa Brave started for Mexico.

She was put on duty in an emergency hospital along the frontier. As
the soldiers were brought in she scanned each face eagerly, but many a
weary day passed before she had any tidings of Ima.

To every inquiry she sent out, the report came back, “Missing.”

A great fear came upon her that Ima had been killed. She couldn’t bear
the thought that her big handsome brave brother had died without even
a record of what had happened; but she worked industriously, nursing
other people’s brothers and writing letters to the loved ones at home
to relieve their anxiety.

While taking a walk one day in her hours off duty, Shesa wandered
farther away from the hospital than usual. She was thinking of Ima.
Before realizing it, she had lost her direction and found herself
in a lovely little valley. The scenery along the border had been so
uninteresting, with low cactus plants growing out of the sand, and
scrub bushes stretching away in low irregular outline, that this spot
came as a delightful surprise.

Spying a little cabin on the side of the mountain above the valley, she
decided to inquire the way back, and, quickening her steps, reached it
in a short time.

A slovenly woman appeared at the door. Five small children surrounded
her, pulling at her skirts as they saw the stranger. The youngest set
up a howl of disapproval as Shesa came nearer. In her arms the woman
held a baby and in one hand a tin pan of maize or corn. A few chickens
came scurrying around the corner of the house as the woman tapped a
wooden paddle on the edge of the pan.

The woman stopped and eyed Shesa suspiciously as she came still nearer.

“Good afternoon,” said Shesa with a smile. “Do you speak English?”

“Howdy,” grunted the woman. “Yes. Hush up, will ye?” to the children,
whose noises made conversation difficult.

“United States?” she asked as she looked Shesa’s uniform over.

“Yes, yes,” replied Shesa. “I’m a nurse.”

“Nuss?” said the woman. “Then ye’ll know what be ailing him. Come in.”

[Illustration: “SISTER!” HE EXCLAIMED]

Shesa hesitated a moment before entering the low cabin which was
scarcely more than a hut; but, being a brave girl, she thought, “If I
am needed, I mustn’t hesitate. I’ll try to find out what’s wanted.”

“Tell me about your trouble,” she said kindly to the woman. “Is your
husband ill?”

“Nope,” the woman shook her head, “he be all right. It’s a U. S. man we
found up yonder,” pointing up the mountain road. “Been shot in arm. My
man brought him home, but his arm gets worse all time. You know what to
do?”

“I think I can help,” said Shesa, wishing with all her heart she had
brought her emergency kit with her. “Let me see your patient.”

The woman led the way into the only bedroom in the cabin. On a rude
wooden bed lay a young man, dressed in a much soiled khaki uniform.
At the sound of Shesa’s voice, he started up. “Sister!” he exclaimed.
“Why, this seems too good to be true! Oh, perhaps I’m dreaming. My arm
pains so I guess I’m just ‘seeing things’ from fever.”

For one moment Shesa lost her self-control. Tears filled her eyes and
she longed to throw her arms about Ima’s neck and cry to her heart’s
content. “But I must not,” she chided herself. “I must do everything I
can to help him.”

“It’s not a dream, Ima, dear,” she said as naturally as if they were in
their faraway home. “You are ill and certainly do need me. Let me see
your arm.”

The sight of his poor wounded arm made her feel sick, for it evidently
had been neglected from the first.

“How did it happen?” Shesa asked, as she tore her apron into bandages
and directed the woman to boil some water on the open fire which she
had seen outside.

She saw that Ima wanted to talk, sick and weary as he was.

“I was taking a stroll alone one evening,” he explained, “not thinking
of the least danger, for our camp lights were scarcely out of sight.
Suddenly I heard the report of a gun, and felt an awful pain in my
right arm. One of the bandits had evidently spotted me from ambush. I’d
have been all right, but the fellow or an accomplice sprang upon me,
and after a struggle knocked me senseless and took my emergency kit and
everything else useful away from me. The settler who owns this cabin
found me and brought me up here on his shoulders. His wife did what
she could for my wound, but it became infected almost immediately, and
I was too weak from loss of blood to walk back to camp, even with the
man’s help. Besides, in some way, I had a sprained ankle.”

“Well, dear, you are going to be helped in every way soon, so don’t
talk any more,” said Shesa, taking off some of the dirty rags which the
woman had tied clumsily upon Ima’s ankle. She bathed the ankle in hot
water and bound it firmly in a figure-of-eight bandage, which gave him
the first ease from pain since the accident.

She replaced the outside layers of the dirty bandages on his wounded
arm. “The wounds may bleed if I take the dressings off,” she decided
wisely, “and I have no remedies here.”

“I wonder why the man didn’t go for help?” she thought.

Just at that moment Ima whispered, “I would have sent word to camp, but
for some reason the settler seems afraid—of the bandits, maybe.”

“Well,” said Shesa, “you rest here, and we’ll soon have help.”

“But, Shesa, it will be dangerous for you to go,” said Ima. Then
suddenly, “Why, how did you happen to come here, anyhow?”

“Never mind, dear, I’ll explain all that later,” replied Shesa.

“But I want to hear now,” insisted Ima, his eyes bright with fever. So
to satisfy him, Shesa briefly related the story of her little walk.

“Now,” she added “since the emergency hospital is so near, you need not
worry until I come back?”

He promised to try not to worry, and fell into a dozy sleep within a
few minutes.




CHAPTER XV

A TELEGRAM FROM MEXICO


SHESA hurried along by the path she thought she had taken to reach the
cabin, but after walking ten minutes, found herself going in the wrong
direction.

“How dreadful!” she exclaimed, “when I am in such a hurry!”

She looked about her. “It is nearing sunset,” she whispered, looking at
the sky. “Oh, I wish I knew the way!”

Just at that moment a noise in the underbrush startled her. Although
very brave, she was dreadfully afraid of snakes, even harmless ones,
but she laughed when she saw a tiny prairie dog scamper out of the
bushes, stand on his hind feet and look about him with blinking eyes.

“How foolish I am!” she thought, but shuddered again as she heard
someone stepping up behind her.

“I beg pardon,” said a gentlemanly voice—and turning, you can imagine
how relieved Shesa was to see a United States soldier standing with his
hat in his hand.

“Oh,” she cried happily, “I’m so thankful to see you. Will you help me
find my way to the emergency hospital?” Then she stopped and laughed.
“I must apologize for speaking this way,” she said, “but you will
understand my excitement when I explain all that has happened to me
this afternoon.”

The soldier quickly led the way as she talked.

They soon arrived at the emergency hospital, and after Shesa’s
explanation, the doctors took her in a field ambulance up to the cabin,
the soldier showing the way.

Within two hours, Private Brave lay on a clean white cot, with clean
dressings on his arm and comforting broth in his stomach.

[Illustration: “WILL YOU HELP ME FIND MY WAY TO THE EMERGENCY
HOSPITAL?”]

“I feel a hundred per cent better already,” he said to Shesa as she
kissed him good-night. “In the morning I’ll be well.”

But in the morning the doctors shook their heads. “I’m afraid that arm
will have to be amputated,” said the chief surgeon.

“Oh, Doctor!” exclaimed Shesa, “can’t it be saved?”

“If it is saved,” said the doctor gruffly, not liking to show how
sorry he was for the pretty nurse, “it will be saved for a dead man.
A neglected infected wound, even small, may mean gangrene. This is a
large, badly neglected infected wound!”

Shesa bit her lips and held back the tears, saying, “Of course, if it’s
to save his life, Doctor—” Then she went out to telegraph to her family.

The telegram read:

    _Ima found, wounded. Will bring home soon as possible._

    _Shesa._

[Illustration: “OH, DOCTOR! CAN’T IT BE SAVED?”]

“Oh, how I hope all comes out right,” she thought.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER XVI

PRIVATE BRAVE’S ADVENTURES


THREE weeks later, a soldier with one arm and his very attentive sister
were looked upon with much interest by the other passengers on a
steamer going to New York.

[Illustration: A SOLDIER AND HIS VERY ATTENTIVE SISTER]

Ima stood the journey well, but when they arrived at the station, Shesa
decided to take him direct to the Dolls’ Hospital to rest instead of
home, where he would be under a good deal of excitement.

So it was in the Dolls’ Hospital that the Brave family came together
again, rejoicing in the escape of their soldier. Even Mike, the dog,
was allowed to come, and no one greeted him with more joy than did
their family pet.

Private Brave didn’t mend as well as the doctors and nurses had hoped.
Within a week after his arrival at the hospital, an abscess developed
on his left forearm, which caused everyone to worry, and another
operation was all that saved poor Private Brave from losing his only
remaining arm.

The assistant nurse dressed and bandaged this abscess with—


ROLLER BANDAGES

(_See Reference List_)

    Roller bandages are usually made of long straight
    pieces of gauze. This material “gives” to the form of
    the arm much better than muslin. Never put a bandage on
    wet, for it shrinks and is too tight when dry.

    You will be interested in seeing a picture on page 99
    of how a roller bandage is applied to an arm or leg.

    This picture shows one of Mary Frances’ big dolls
    bandaged in roller bandages.

    The two-and-a-half-inch wide roller bandage four or six
    yards long is the size most used for grown-up people,
    although narrower ones are needed for fingers.

    On the doll’s body inch-wide bandages were used, and
    the ends were sewed in place. To prevent slipping,
    strips of adhesive plaster were placed over the folds
    of the edges.

Under the assistant nurse’s kind care, Private Brave soon grew better
and was able to take an interest in the other patients.

[Illustration: ROLLER BANDAGES]

He begged to be allowed to visit the boys’ ward, where he wouldn’t be
so lonely.

There was great excitement among the boys in the ward, none of whom
were very ill, when a real soldier came to visit them.

They coaxed him to tell them about his adventures.

They liked best the story about how he lost his arm, and this one about
the stolen baby:


THE WAY PRIVATE BRAVE SAVED A BABY’S LIFE

“We were riding along one day, when I thought I heard a baby’s cry.
None of the other boys seemed to hear it, and as we were not riding in
order, I headed my horse toward the sound. I had about concluded that
I was mistaken, when the horse stopped short. The crying had ceased by
this time.

[Illustration: WE PUT THE BABY INTO HER ARMS]

“I looked down, and there among the sage-brush, at the horse’s feet,
was a little baby about a year old. How it came in such a place, I have
no idea. There was no house within forty miles, and we hadn’t met a
soul.

“I got off my horse and picked the little thing up and rode with it to
our captain. It appeared to be half starved and surely could not have
survived much longer.

“We carried it with us into camp, fed it and took care of it as best we
could.

“On making inquiries, we found the baby had been stolen from some poor
white settlers. Who did it or why, no one ever found out.

“When the poor mother came into camp and we put the baby into her arms
she was the happiest woman I ever saw.”

“Wasn’t that grand!” cried Bobby to Sammy, the little lame boy in the
next bed. Sammy was the plaster-of-Paris doll Mary Frances had bought
for a nickel at the children’s fair.

All the patients were sorry—and the doctors and nurses, too—when the
time came for Private Brave to leave the hospital.

He had been so bright and cheerful that they would miss him greatly.

He felt sorry, too, in a way, for so many interesting things had
happened; for instance—but perhaps you would rather hear the story of
the mad dog as Private Brave told it to his family.




CHAPTER XVII

THE MAD DOG


PRIVATE BRAVE was comfortably seated in the home living room with his
family gathered around to hear what had happened while he was in the
hospital.

“It was about four o’clock in the afternoon,” he began. “I had just
finished telling the boys about saving the baby, and all my other
experiences which you know, when suddenly we heard a woman crying as
she rushed past the ward door.

“‘Oh, Doctor,’ she sobbed, ‘will he die—will my little boy die? He
didn’t know the dog would bite, poor child! He says the dog isn’t mad,
but everybody else says he is!’

“‘Come,’ said the doctor, ‘mad or not, we’ll fix this young man up so
he’ll be quite safe. I’m glad you brought him to me immediately.’

“I was on my feet in an instant, and ran to the office door, for I was
very anxious to hear what would be done for the little boy.

“‘This must be cauterized, Nurse,’ said the doctor. ‘Get nitrate of
silver ready.’

“He dipped a wooden stick into the poison and turned it around in the
wound, the little boy screaming with the pain.

“‘Oh, Doctor,’ asked his mother, ‘must he be hurt so much?’

“‘Safety must first be considered,’ replied the doctor. ‘We are
probably destroying the dreadful germs of hydrophobia. And, next, this
little boy must be given Pasteur treatment with the wonderful serum
used to prevent hydrophobia, for hydrophobia means the most terrible
suffering anybody could imagine. Of course, no one is quite certain
that the dog was mad; for many a time a dog which has been nearly
crazed with thirst, or been the victim of bad boys’ pranks, has been
thought mad.’

“‘But this doggy wasn’t mad,’ the boy cried out, forgetting his pain.
‘A bad boy was twisting his tail and the poor doggy thought I did it
because I was near!’

“‘Are you certain, little fellow?’ asked the doctor.

“‘Yes, sir, and after he bit me, a big man beat him with his cane, and
the poor doggy ran yelping down the street. Oh, how you made my arm
ache, Doctor!’

“‘Poor boy!’ said the doctor, ‘I really had to hurt you.’

“‘What should I have done, Doctor, if we had been miles from a
physician?’ asked the mother.

“‘That’s a good question,’ replied Doctor Surecure. ‘I will tell you
the simplest treatment for an untrained person to use—


FOR DOG BITE

(_See Reference List_)

    Whether there is _danger of hydrophobia_ or not, if
    bite is on limb, tie a cloth tightly around limb
    between wound and body, and encourage bleeding by
    squeezing. Wash with soap and hot water. Apply iodine.
    Loosen cloth in an hour.

    If there is the _slightest_ danger of _hydrophobia_,
    _get patient to a doctor!_ If impossible to get a
    doctor, apply nitrate of silver, or pure carbolic
    acid with a soft stick. But it seems that there are
    few places where a doctor cannot be consulted within
    twenty-four hours,—who will see that the patient is
    given Pasteur treatment to prevent hydrophobia from
    developing.

“Well, I am certainly glad to learn that, my son,” said Private Brave’s
mother. “We had a terrible fright the day the little boy was bitten,
for somebody said that our Mike did it.”

“What!” exclaimed Private Brave. “Did anybody dare accuse this most
faithful and wonderfully brave dog-member of the Brave family?”

Mike had been lying at his young master’s feet; in fact, he hadn’t left
him since he came home—not even to eat his dinner. On hearing his name,
Mike stood up, wagging his tail so hard that you would have thought it
would drop off unless it was nailed on.

He looked inquiringly upon the family, his mouth open and his
intelligent brown eyes questioning what all this talk meant.

“It wasn’t you, Michael, old boy, good old fellow!” exclaimed Ibee,
petting him.

[Illustration: “IT WASN’T YOU, MICHAEL, OLD BOY!”]

“Bow! Bow!” barked Mike, and Ibee declared he smiled.

“Well,” said Private Brave, “that was—” He didn’t finish the sentence,
for at that instant the next door neighbor came running into the room.

“Oh, come, Miss Shesa!” she exclaimed. “My baby’s dying—she’s swallowed
poison.”




CHAPTER XVIII

THE POISONED BABY


SHESA hastened away with the neighbor, for she knew that any delay
might cost the baby’s life. She could hear the little girl’s agonizing
screams.

“Ibee, run for the doctor,” she called.

“We must work until the doctor comes,” she said to the distracted
mother. She was wise enough to realize that it would be best to keep
the mother busy.

“What kind of poison—do you know?” asked Shesa anxiously, as they ran
up the steps of the porch.

“Lye,” answered the mother briefly. “The maid was scrubbing the kitchen
steps, and left the can of lye on the floor. Baby came along, saying
‘dink, dink,’ and before Sally Ann could get into the door, baby had
swallowed a mouthful. It couldn’t have been very strong, for Sally Ann
had filled up the can with water.”

Shesa took the baby on her lap and looked into its poor little burnt
mouth.

“Bring a glass of water and some vinegar,” she ordered. When they came,
she diluted the vinegar with water giving the baby a teaspoonful at a
time.

“Bring the juice of a lemon,” she said. This she diluted, giving it to
the baby in the same way.

It must have stopped some of the suffering, for the little one began to
seem more comfortable.

“Now, the beaten white of an egg in water,” she said at length. Of this
she gave the baby a tablespoonful; then a tablespoonful of olive oil,
holding its little mouth shut to make it swallow.

By the time the doctor arrived, the baby had fallen asleep on Shesa’s
lap.

“You have saved this baby’s life, Miss Brave,” said the doctor. “If it
hadn’t been for prompt action, the child might have died.”

[Illustration: “BRING A GLASS OF WATER AND SOME VINEGAR”]

“People are so careless with poisons,” he went on. “Poisons should
never be placed within the reach of little children. All bottles
should be labeled plainly, and the stoppers should be tied about with
a piece of gauze—not very attractive, I admit, but one of the best
safeguards against making a mistake as to the ‘right bottle.’ Poisons
should not be kept in the general medicine closet, but in a place by
themselves—unless we except iodine, which has such a decided odor that
it may be kept in a more accessible place, ready for its many uses.”

After complimenting Shesa again on her treatment of the baby, and
leaving some medicines for both the baby and the baby’s mother, the
doctor went away.

Shesa was met by her mother as she started home.

“We are all so anxious, dear,” she said, “to learn how the baby is.”

“The baby’s all right,” smiled Shesa.

“How thankful Ima will be!” exclaimed her mother. “It brings tears to
my eyes to see how interested that dear boy is in everybody, thinking
so little about his own misfortunes. Think of a young man just at his
age losing an arm!”

“Father told me that last night when he tried to express a little
sympathy, Ima said, ‘Well, Father, it is a loss; but you know, I have
one arm left!’” Shesa replied.

“Wasn’t that wonderful!” exclaimed Mrs. Brave.

[Illustration: “YOU HAVE SAVED THIS BABY’S LIFE, MISS BRAVE”]

“It certainly is wonderful how bravely he takes his troubles,” replied
Shesa. “Father said he thought that it really required more bravery to
feel that way than to go to the battlefield.”

By this time they had reached home, and Shesa had to tell everybody
about the saving of the life of the poisoned baby.




CHAPTER XIX

HURRAH FOR OUR HERO


THE Brave family were not the only people who admired Private Brave’s
cheerful acceptance of his fate and his determination to make his left
hand learn to do the work of two hands.

One day when he was running the lawn mower over the lawn in front of
the house, Doctor Quickenquack stopped in his dollsmobile.

“Hello, how’s the ‘General’?” he called. “Can’t you jump in and take a
ride? Hope you’re not too busy to have a little holiday.”

“Thank you, Doctor,” said Private Brave, “it’s certainly kind of you to
ask me. Will you wait until I put this mower away and get my coat?”

He had to lock the door, for none of the family were home, but he
hopped into the car in a minute’s time. The doctor started the engine
and away they rode toward Painted River and Looking Glass Lake. It was
a beautiful morning and Private Brave enjoyed the ride very much.

“If you will just let me out here, I’ll walk home from this corner,”
said he as they came to River Avenue.

“Not much, sir; you’re kidnapped,” laughed the doctor as he drove on
toward the hospital.

“First, your lunch; then a visit to the boys’ ward,” said the doctor.
“That’s your program, sir.”

Private Brave was delighted with the idea, and how he enjoyed his lunch
after the ride!

When he went with the doctor to the boys’ ward, you can’t imagine how
surprised he was to see all his own family. Not only they were there,
but also the boys’ class and the girls’ class in first-aid.

Besides these, wore Miss Bossem and Miss Helpem and Doctor Surecure and
even the ambulance driver, Billy.

Doctor Quickenquack led Private Brave under an American flag which was
draped in one corner of the room.

“Dear Private Brave,” said Doctor Surecure, clearing his throat, “it is
my pleasure to present to you a gift from some of your many admiring
friends.”

Private Brave blushed at the praise, and smiled as Miss Helpem carried
forward a box which she placed on the little table beside him.

He opened the lid and lifted out a beautiful little hand-embroidered
silk flag.

“Perhaps we’d better help you open the box the rest of the way,”
suggested Doctor Surecure. “Let us step into the next room.”

When the doctors and Private Brave came back—what do you think? Private
Brave was waving the beautiful little silk flag in the hand of a new
wooden arm, so skilfully made that it had almost human action.

“Hurrah!” shouted the boys and girls in delight. “Hurrah! Hurrah for
Private Brave! Hurrah for Our Hero!”

“Hurrah! Hurrah!” they shouted together at the top of their lungs.

[Illustration: HE OPENED THE LID AND LIFTED OUT A BEAUTIFUL LITTLE
HAND-EMBROIDERED SILK FLAG]

“Hurrah for Private Brave! He’s—

    Prepared for less,
      Prepared for more,
    Prepared for peace,
      Prepared for war!

    Prepared for well,
      Prepared for ill,
    Prepared to save
      The doctor’s bill!

    Prepared for calm,
      Prepared for strife,
    Prepared for anything
      In life!

       *       *       *       *       *

“Oh, Billy,” cried Mary Frances, after it was all over, “I’m so
thankful to you for your birthday present.”

“What do you mean?” yawned Billy.

“Why, for the day we’ve just spent together in the playroom,” said Mary
Frances.

“Don’t know what you’re talking about,” pretended Billy.

“Why, Billy!” Mary Frances laughed. “If you will just put a triangular
bandage on my hand with your handkerchief, you’ll remember.”

Billy put it on beautifully, just as you saw it shown on Mary Frances’
doll in the picture.

“Now, you remember, Mr. Ambulance Driver!” cried Mary Frances, shaking
her finger.

“I don’t seem to remember a thing about how I learned,” solemnly
declared Billy.

“Why, certainly you do. You learned in the Dolls’ Hospital,” cried Mary
Frances.

“Oh, maybe—but don’t tell anybody about it, though I must say that a
knowledge of bandaging will be most useful when the boy scouts commence
their class in advanced first-aid work.”

[Illustration: THERE THEY WERE!]

“Will Miss Bossem be their teacher?” teased Mary Frances.

“Aw! Stop talking about that doll of yours dressed up as a nurse, Mary
Frances! We boys are beyond the doll-baby age!” Billy walked away in
pretended disgust.

“Well,” said Mary Frances to herself, “if Billy hadn’t known how to put
on that bandage I would think I had been dreaming. I know what I’ll do!
I’ll go see if there are any nurses’ uniforms in the playroom.”

There they were! Each girl doll had one on, just as she wore it at the
Fourth of July celebration.

“It must have been real!” concluded Mary Frances. “It must have been!
That proves it! Besides, here is Private Brave, and in his wooden hand
he is holding the—

[Illustration]




    A READY REFERENCE LIST

    OF

    ORDINARY ACCIDENTS
    AND ILLNESSES

    ALPHABETICALLY ARRANGED

    WITH

    APPROVED HOME REMEDIES




A FEW GENERAL REMARKS


In the story part of this little book, the author has endeavored to
show that success in first-aid treatment of any open wound lies in
protecting the wound from infection.

From long years of experience, physicians have found that:

1. Every open wound should be touched with an antiseptic to kill germs
which may have entered; and that the best general antiseptic known is
_iodine_.

2. No wound should be closed entirely from the air; therefore, do not
use adhesive plaster or collodion to cover a cut or wound, but cover it
with sterile gauze after using iodine. The gauze may be held in place
at each side by adhesive plaster or by a bandage.

_When sending for the doctor, be sure to let him know what is the
matter: for instance, poison case, or drowning, or choking—so that he
may bring the articles necessary to treat the case._

N. B.—In case of wounds from powder, or punctured wounds, as from rusty
nail, see a doctor who will treat patient with anti-tetanic serum.

Read the chapters concerning bandages: Chapters XIII and XVI.

Bandages are used: 1. To hold dressings in place.

2. To support the parts. 3. To hold splints in place.

Never use wet bandages—they shrink in drying.

Never put a tight bandage over a wet compress; use a loose triangular
bandage. The _exclusion of air_ might also cause blisters.

An emetic is a medicine which causes vomiting.

To sterilize a needle or knife blade, dip into alcohol or pass through
an alcohol or gas flame; or hold in boiling waiter several minutes.

To make a saturated solution dissolve in water as much of the powder
mentioned as possible.

NOTE.—Remember that heat in the form of hot drinks and hot applications
is the best kind of stimulant.




A READY REFERENCE LIST


Reference to poisonous remedies has been carefully avoided as much as
possible.

Where dosage is not mentioned in the following, refer to List of
Remedies for the Home Medicine Closet, page 136.


Biliousness.

Give citrate of magnesia, or Epsom or Rochelle salt, or [J]castor oil.
Cracked ice slowly melted in the mouth generally relieves sick stomach.

Hot, clear coffee given after any of the above medicines counteracts
greatly the nauseating effect.


Bites of Dogs, Cats, Snakes.

If on a limb, tie a cloth tightly around limb, between wound and body.
Loosen slightly in an hour. Encourage bleeding by squeezing, to get
poison out, or suck and spit out blood from the wound, being careful to
see there are no cuts or wounds in the mouth or lips, through which the
poison may enter. _Apply iodine._

If _hydrophobia_ (rabies) is suspected, _send for doctor at once_, who
will see that correct treatment is given. This treatment is concerned
with the injection of a serum into the blood. See Chapter XVII.


Bites of Insects, Spiders, etc.

Treat as for _stings_.

These are seldom dangerous to life.


“Black Eye.”

For “black eye,” use either cold or hot water compresses immediately.
Massage gently for discoloration.


Bleeding of Gums.

Rinse mouth with alum water—1 teaspoon powdered alum in a glass of ice
water; or 1 tsp. tincture of myrrh in 1 tbsp. water.


Blood Blisters.

Do not open. Apply hot water.


Broken Bones or Fractures.

There are two kinds of fractures:

    1. Simple, where the bone only is broken.

    2. Compound, where the skin is broken through at point
    of fracture.

_Treatment:_

Send for doctor at once. Much harm is done by unskilled handling. Do
not move patient unless absolutely necessary.

If a compound fracture, apply iodine. Bandage a sterile gauze compress
loosely over wound, tie a cloth tightly around limb, between wound and
body. See “Hemorrhage” in this list.

Using _extreme gentleness_, place limb in comfortable position on a
pillow or pad, and tie fast with strips of muslin or bandages.

If impossible to get doctor for a long time, and patient must be moved,
use extreme carefulness, and tie limb to padded splints with bandages.

Rulers, umbrellas, sticks, rolled newspapers, may be used for splints.
If an arm, after applying splints, place in sling made with triangular
bandage, or pin coat sleeve to front of shirt.

Treat for “Shock.”


Bruises or Contusions.

“Black and blue” spots from blow or fall or pinching, causing blood
vessels to rupture under skin.

Apply at first:

    Ice, or ice water; or
    Alcohol and water, half and half; or
    Witch hazel, or arnica; or
    Vinegar diluted with water.

Afterward use hot applications. Gentle rubbing or massaging helps
dispel the discoloration. If surface is scraped, as from fall in sand,
see “Wounds.”


Burns and Scalds.

There are three different degrees of burns:

    1. Mere reddening of the skin (slight burns).

    2. Formation of blisters (deeper burns).

    3. Charring and destruction of the skin and tissues.

1. For slight burns (first degree), apply any of the following:

Bicarbonate of soda (baking soda) mixed in water to the thickness of
milk, olive oil, cream, vaseline, lard, butter, white of egg, or flour
and water paste, or starch and water.

Spread gauze compress[K] with the material used, and bandage loosely in
place.

2. In deeper burns (second degree), be careful in removing clothing—cut
it off, if necessary, to prevent tearing the skin.

Bandage on loosely compresses wet in one of the following:

(_a_) Normal Salt Solution (1 level tsp. salt in 1 pint boiled water);

or

(_b_) Carron Oil (½ lime water, ½ linseed oil);

or

(_c_) Saturated Solution Bicarbonate of Soda. (Dissolve as much baking
soda as possible in a cup of boiled water;)

or

(_d_) Picric Acid Gauze Compress.

    Follow any of these treatments with Boric Acid
    Ointment. (See List of Medicines, No. 22).

    =Blisters.= Later, puncture blisters near base with a
    sharp instrument which has been sterilized by dipping
    in alcohol. Mop up the watery discharge with a little
    aseptic absorbent cotton, throwing it away. Never open
    blisters far enough to loosen skin. Dress with gauze
    compresses, dusted with boric acid. Use several small
    compresses if burned surface is large.

3. In very severe burns (third degree) little can be done. _Send for
the doctor._ Do not remove clothing. Make patient as comfortable as
possible.

For burns about the eye, anoint with olive oil and wash out with boric
acid solution in eye dropper or eye cup. (See List of Medicines, No.
3.) Use compresses wrung out of ice water. See doctor.


Car Sickness.

Fresh air. Lying-down position.

Do not look out of window at moving objects. Keep eyes closed.


Chilblains.

Chilblains are the result of too rapid warming of cold parts, generally
feet or fingers. Sometimes for years after being frost-bitten, exposure
to severe cold will produce itching and burning, and perhaps swelling
and ulcers.

_Treatment:_

Rub with turpentine or alcohol. The rubbing in itself is excellent. See
doctor.


Chills.

Use heat. Apply hot-water bags under arms, on thighs and at feet. Give
hot foot bath, in which is 1 tbsp. mustard. Rub limbs toward body, to
restore circulation. Give hot coffee or tea, or hot lemonade. Wrap in
blankets and put to bed. Chills indicate oncoming illness—see doctor!
See Chapter XI.


Choking.

Slap on back. Pass finger down throat. This usually causes vomiting. If
a child, hold him up by the feet, head downward, and slap on the back.
Send for doctor, if severe.


Coal Gas, Suffocation from.

_Send for doctor._

Get patient into fresh air—loosen clothing. Keep patient warm with
hot-water bags. Rub limbs toward body. Dash cold water in face. Doctor
will probably use artificial respiration.


Colds.

At the _first sign_ of “taking a cold”—use some simple remedy, such
as inhaling camphor from time to time for several hours. Dampen the
center of a handkerchief in water, and drop on it some spirit of
camphor. _Eat a sliced onion._[L]

Take two drops of spirit of camphor on a tsp. sugar.

Or, drop five drops camphor in ½ tumbler of water. Take a tsp. every
half hour.

Ginger tea is a much valued old-fashioned remedy. Pour boiling water
over a tbsp. bruised ginger root. Let stand two hours. The dose is 1
tbsp. every hour or two.

If the “cold” continues, take a laxative, such as castor oil or
rhubarb, and follow the dose with a hot foot bath at night and hot
lemonade after getting into bed, to induce perspiration. Keep well
covered.

If a cough comes with the cold, lemon juice and sugar syrup make a
pleasant cough remedy; or molasses-and-vinegar syrup is liked by
children. Mix in the proportion of 1 tbsp. vinegar to 2 tbsp. molasses.

_Flaxseed tea_ will sometimes relieve a “tickling” cough. Pour 2 cups
of boiling water over 1 tbsp. whole flaxseeds. Stir; let simmer gently
one-half hour. Add juice of half a lemon, and sugar if desired. Take a
tbsp. as often as wished.

If the chest is sore, rub it with camphorated oil, or ammonia liniment,
which is made by shaking together in a bottle 4 tbsp. olive (sweet) oil
and 1 tbsp. household ammonia. This hardens upon standing a few days—so
it is best made as needed.

All these are simple home remedies, but if a cold is severe, see a
doctor. A neglected cold is dangerous.


Colic.

Colic pains in abdomen are generally caused by indigestible food,
overeating, constipation, etc.

_Treatment:_

Give peppermint in hot water; hot-water enema. Keep abdomen warmly
wrapped in flannel; use hot-water bottles, or turpentine stupe.

If a child—massage abdomen with warm olive oil.


Convulsions of Children.

Caused by indigestion, constipation or oncoming illness. Child becomes
stiff, pulse is weak and rapid. Breathing is feeble, face is pale at
_first_, afterward livid.

_Treatment:_

Send for doctor. Place child in warm bath, with ice bag (or ice-water
cloths) on head.


Corns.

For soft corn, apply vaseline.

For hard corn, apply iodine and remove pressure by using corn plaster.

For a very sore corn, use a bread poultice at night. (See “Plasters and
Poultices” at end of this list, page 134.)


Croup.

Croup is generally more alarming than dangerous.

Give 1 teaspoon syrup of ipecac to make child vomit.

Apply cloths wrung out of hot water on neck and chest.

A boiling tea kettle, in which there are 2 tbsp. compound tincture of
benzoin, will afford relief. Direct the steam toward the child so that
some of it may be inhaled.

Keep the child in the same warm room forty-eight hours, maintaining the
atmosphere at an even temperature.

The day after the attack, give the child castor oil or simple syrup of
rhubarb.

If croup does not clear up in twenty-four hours, see the _doctor_ for
membranous croup or diphtheria.


[Illustration: HOW TO STRAP A CUT FINGER]

Cuts (Slight).

Touch with—

    _Tincture of iodine, or if iodine is not at hand_,

    Alcohol, or

    Vinegar and water—equal parts.

If edges are spread far apart, strap together with narrow _strips_ of
adhesive plaster _across_ wound. Wrap with sterile gauze.

If cut is larger, after applying iodine, fasten on a gauze compress—cut
½ inch larger than wound—with a bandage, or with _strips_ of adhesive
plaster.

_Caution._—Never cover a wound or cut airtight. (See also Chapter VII.)


Diarrhea.

Usually caused by indigestion, impure water, etc. Home remedies are raw
flour and water paste; a raw egg in a cup of hot tea; spiced syrup of
rhubarb.

Give a dose of castor oil to clear the digestive tract of the
irritating material. If there is much pain, keep abdomen warm with
flannel and hot-water bag. If a small child, restrict diet to barley
water and white of egg in water.

Give adults milk and other liquid foods. If persistent, see doctor.


Earache.

Caused sometimes by bad teeth, but generally by cold or hardened ear
wax.

Hold ear over cloth wrung out of hot water, on which are several drops
of alcohol. Syringe ear with warm bicarbonate of soda water—1 tsp. to a
cup; or peroxide of hydrogen water—1 tbsp. to a cup of water.

One drop laudanum, or one drop arnica to three drops very warm olive
oil, dropped into ear with a medicine dropper, often relieves pain;
or cotton may be saturated with the warm olive oil and placed in the
ear and covered with dry cotton. To prevent hardening of wax: keep ear
anointed with ordinary red vaseline (unbleached vaseline). For watery
discharge of ear, dust with dry boric acid.


Fainting.

Caused by too small a quantity of blood to the brain.

To prevent: Fresh air; drink of cold water; ½ tsp. aromatic spirit of
ammonia in water; bending head over between knees.

If the person has fainted:

    Keep crowd back; place in lying-down position.

    Dash face with cold water.

    Let patient inhale smelling salts or household ammonia.

    Rub limbs toward body.

Remember: An unconscious person cannot swallow. Medicine may enter
windpipe and cause strangulation. After patient becomes conscious, give
stimulants; such as aromatic spirit of ammonia or hot coffee.


Fever Blisters (Cold Sores).

Apply boric acid ointment,[M] or touch frequently with spirit of nitre
or spirit of camphor.


Fits.

There are two kinds:

1. _Hysterical_—sobbing, crying and laughing without cause, jerky
movement of the limbs.

_Treatment:_

Let patient quietly alone.

2. _Epileptic_—convulsive movements and unconsciousness.

_Treatment:_

Keep patient from biting tongue by putting a piece of wood or folded
cloth between teeth. Lay on side; loosen clothing; turn face to side so
that secretions may not strangle.

After the fit, let patient sleep.

Do _not_ give stimulants.


Foreign Body in Ear.

If an insect, drown out with warm olive oil, or pour a little pure
alcohol into ear.

Do not probe ear.


Foreign Body in Eye.

Wink. Do not rub.

Lift upper lid down over lower, blowing opposite nostril.

If these means fail, turn lid back over a toothpick, removing foreign
body gently with the pointed corner of a handkerchief. For bits of
plaster, use dilute vinegar in eye cup. For acids, use very dilute
bicarbonate of soda solution. (See Chapter XI.)


Frost Bites.

Parts frozen turn whitish or waxy looking.

Do not bring patient into a warm room.

Use cold applications. Keep in cold room. (See Chapter VII.)

Rub with snow’ or ice-water cloths, _very gradually_ applying heat.


“Gum Boils” or “Canker Sores.”

So-called “gum boils” or “canker sores” are little ulcer-like sores
which at times appear in children’s mouths, caused by disarrangement
of the stomach. Local applications, such as borax or powdered alum,
shrink the sores and give a little relief; but the child should be
given a dose of calcined magnesia at night or citrate of magnesia in
the morning. (Never give a small dose of citrate of magnesia; a child
of twelve years should take a tumblerful.)


Heat Exhaustion. (Collapse Due to Excessive Heat.) Dangerous!

In heat exhaustion, the symptoms and treatment are similar to
_shock:_ pale face; weak, feeble heart beats; great weakness, but not
unconsciousness; shallow breathing; cold, clammy perspiration on face.

_Treatment:_ Send for doctor. Remove to cool place.

Do _not_ use cold applications. Give stimulants—hot coffee, tea,
aromatic spirit of ammonia, etc. Cover with blankets and use hot-water
bottles.


Hemorrhage (Severe Bleeding).

Send for doctor. While waiting, try to staunch flow of blood.

If wound is in a limb:

If blood is _red_, and comes in _spurts_ (_arterial_)—

    Elevate wounded part, tie cloth tightly around limb
    between _wound_ and _body_, or use a tourniquet,[N]
    loosening it in one hour. If not loosened, there is
    danger of gangrene.

    If blood is _dark_, and comes in slow flow (venous)—

    Tie a cloth around between _end_ of limb and wound. Or
    use a tourniquet, loosening it in one hour.

[Illustration: USING A TOURNIQUET]

In either case, bandage a clean gauze compress against wound. If unable
to use these methods because of too rapid bleeding, press fingers into
wound, but have another person tie as described. Do not use finger
pressure if possible to avoid, for the wound should be kept clean.

Any of the following tend to stop bleeding:

    Ice or ice water.
    _Very hot_ water.
    Vinegar, 1 tbsp. to 4 tbsp. water.
    Salt, 1 tsp. to 4 tbsp. water.

Wet a compress (several thicknesses of gauze) in any of these and
bandage on wound.

For hemorrhage of lungs, place ice-bag on chest.

DO NOT GIVE WHISKEY OR BRANDY!

For slight wounds, see “_Cuts_.”


Hiccough.

Generally caused by indigestion.

Nine to fifteen swallows of water without taking a breath, or one or
two soda-mint tablets, will generally give relief. If persistent, cause
vomiting by tickling throat with fingers, or by swallowing a cup of
warm water in which ½ tsp. mustard is dissolved. (See Chapter XI.)


Hives (Nettle Rash).

For itching, rub into them common table salt, or bathe with equal parts
vinegar and water.

Hives indicate stomach trouble. Give citrate of magnesia.

If hives persist, give ½ tsp. table salt in water or ¼ tsp. cream of
tartar in ¼ glass of water three times a day for three days.

If hives still persist, consult doctor. (See Chapter X.)


Indigestion.

Hot water. Soda mints. Aromatic spirit of ammonia. Bicarbonate of soda
(baking soda). Hot applications to the stomach.


Itching.

For itching which affects the whole body, give a bath; apply sulphur
ointment.

Sulphur ointment is made by rubbing 2 tbsp. flowers of sulphur into a
dessertspoonful of lard.


Lice in Hair (Pediculosis).

Wash hair with kerosene, leaving it on over night; or use tincture of
_larkspur_[O] in the same way.

Perhaps the best remedy is _fishberries_.[O]

Five cents worth of the berries may be boiled in 1 pint water for ten
minutes.

Wash hair next day after using any of these remedies.


Nails (Ingrowing).

Scrape surface—a piece of glass is good for this purpose. Cut in
V-shape. Pack absorbent cotton under affected side. Paint with iodine.


Nausea (Sick Stomach).

Give small bits of cracked ice. Soda mint. Lime water.

To crack ice: wrap a piece in a cloth, and hammer.


Nosebleed.

Head in upright position. Raise arm on bleeding side. Loosen collar.
Apply ice in a cloth to bridge of nose and back of neck. A roll of
paper under upper lip. Snuff cold tea up nose, or salt water, 1 tsp. to
cup water, or the same of powdered alum.

If bleeding continues, tie a small wad of cotton with thread; dip it
into peroxide of hydrogen, and plug nostril by pushing the cotton
gently with a pencil. The thread is used to withdraw cotton.

If these means fail, send for doctor.


Perspiration.

For deodorizing—use a paste of borax and water.


Poison Ivy Rash.

The poison ivy plant has _three_ leaves in clusters.

Do not scratch.[P] Mop on rash a saturated solution of Epsom salt (as
much as can be dissolved in a cup of water); or, wash with saturated
solution boric acid. Allow it to dry in the air.

Lime water may be used in place of boric acid.

Wash the affected surface every day, dry and repeat treatment.

Sweet fern tea is very good. Steep the sweet fern in boiling water an
hour, and apply to rash.


Poisoning—Treatment and Antidotes.

Send for doctor, but work immediately.

If you do not know what caused the poisoning, make patient vomit as
soon as possible by giving 1 tsp. mustard in a cup of warm water,
or 1 tsp. salt in a cup of warm water, or 2 tsp. ipecac. Repeat if
necessary.

After vomiting, give white of egg stirred in water; milk; or boiled
starch. Give hot coffee as stimulant.

There are three divisions of poisons:

    (_a_) Those that affect the nervous system; as opium,
    aconite, alcohol.

    (_b_) Those that irritate; as arsenic, tainted food.

    (_c_) Those that corrode (burn); as carbolic acid,
    oxalic acid, bichloride of mercury (which is corrosive
    sublimate), lye, caustic alkalies.

In any case of poisoning, remember that the first-aid treatment is to—

    1. Remove the poisonous material, or

    2. Neutralize its further action.

    3. Remedy the ill effects already produced.

1. To remove the poison, give emetic (to produce vomiting); as mustard
and water or ipecac or salt and water.

An emetic is _not usually used, however, in corrosive_ poisoning (see
(_c_) above) except in the case of bichloride of mercury, for which see
special direction below.

2. To neutralize the further effect of poison, give something to
destroy its action; for instance, if lye is swallowed, give dilute
acid, as vinegar and water.

3. To remedy the ill effects, give stimulants; as strong coffee.


SOME ANTIDOTES

_For Carbolic Acid._—In case of poisoning from _carbolic acid_, give
alcohol and _water_; or, if alcohol is not at hand, 1 tbsp. Epsom salt
in a glass of water, or beaten whites of eggs in milk. Use hot-water
bottle.

_Treatment of Poisoning from Any Other Acids than Carbolic_
(_Corrosives_).—Give alkalies—baking soda, 1 tsp. in a cup water. Lime
water, magnesia, whitewash diluted with water; even a tbsp. of strong
soapsuds. Follow with beaten white of egg and milk, olive oil, coffee.

_Treatment of Poisoning from Alkalies_ (_Lye_, _Household Ammonia_,
_etc._). (_Corrosives._)—Do not cause vomiting. 1 tbsp. vinegar in a
cup of water; lemon juice and water, half and half; orange juice;
follow with whites of egg in milk, olive oil; flour and water; hot
coffee.

_For Bichloride of Mercury_ (_Corrosive Sublimate_).—Give beaten whites
of eggs in water; emetic—warm mustard water (1 tsp. to cup); hot
coffee. Keep patient warm.

_For Iodine._—Give boiled starch, or starch and water, or flour and
water. Give hot coffee. Keep patient warm.

_For Arsenic_ (_Irritant._ _See (b)_.).—Give an emetic; tincture of
iron, white of eggs, coffee.

_For Laudanum_ (_Affects Nerves._ _See (a)_.).—Keep patient awake by
walking. Give strong black coffee.


Powder Wounds.

Dangerous because powder carries germs of “lockjaw.”

Wash the skin. Paint with iodine.

Apply vaseline. This loosens any bits of powder, which may be washed
off the next day.

_Absolutely every wound of this character must be treated by a doctor,
who will inject anti-tetanic serum._ (See Chapter XII.)


Prickly Heat.

Rash, especially on young children, caused by heat. Wash with warm
water and soap. Apply alcohol (one part to three of water). Dust with
talcum powder. (See Chapter X.)


Ptomaine Poisoning.

Symptoms: Severe nausea, purging diarrhea. See doctor.

_Treatment:_ Vomiting is necessary. Give cup warm water in which 1 tsp.
mustard is dissolved, or give 2 tsp. ipecac. Give castor oil.

Apply external heat—hot-water bags.

Give 1 tsp. paregoric, if you have it.


Sea-Sickness.

Cracked ice. The best preventive is to see the doctor a week before
going on ocean trip.


Shock.

The word “shock” refers to the condition of nervous depression which
follows any accident, or sometimes the sight of one’s own wound. The
breathing is feeble; the face pale. Send for doctor. Place patient in
lying-down position. Use hot-water bottles. Give hot coffee; aromatic
spirit of ammonia. Gently massage or rub limbs toward body.

Keep body covered and _warm_. (Sec Chapter III.)


Sore Throat.

At night wrap a cloth wet in alcohol around outside of throat. Gargle
with salt and water (1 tsp. to a glass), or borax and water in same
proportion, or hot tea, or with the following—

Gargle:

    2 tbsp. vinegar,
    1 tbsp. salt,
    Water to fill a tumbler.

If persistent, see doctor.


Splinters.

Open wound with sterile needle. Pull splinter out from the direction it
entered. Apply iodine or turpentine.

If under nail, cut nail in V-shape at point where splinter entered,
before extracting splinter. Use tweezers. Paint the place with iodine.

A pair of extracting tweezers cost little, and should be in every
household.

To make needle or tweezers sterile, dip in alcohol or pass through a
flame.


Sprain.

If at all severe, send for doctor.

Elevate limb. Apply cloth wrung from ice water, or an ice bag, for
several hours, then apply heat. Bandage to keep limb at rest.


Stiff Neck.

Rub with sassafras oil or with capsicum vaseline.


Stings.

Extract sting if it remains imbedded in flesh. Apply household ammonia,
diluted with a little water, or solution of bicarbonate of soda (1 tsp.
soda to 1 cup water).

Mud, wet salt, slice of onion, arnica, witch hazel, camphor are
soothing. If there is much swelling, apply cracked ice. Apply spirit of
camphor or alcohol to mosquito bites.


Strain of Muscles.

Apply ice-water cloths or an ice bag. If the cold fails to give relief
in an hour, apply heat. Bathe with arnica, alcohol and water, and rest
the parts.


Sunburn.

To prevent: Anoint exposed parts with cold cream, vaseline, or use
toilet powder before going out.

_Treatment:_ Never wash sunburn. Never open blisters.

Apply—

    1 part lime water, 3 parts olive oil, shaken together
    in a bottle.


Sunstroke (Collapse Due to Exposure to Rays of Sun).

Distinguish between sunstroke and heat exhaustion.

In sunstroke the symptoms are: red face; rapid heart beats; headache;
vomiting; fever; noisy breathing and sighing; stupor; no perspiration;
unconsciousness.

_Treatment:_ Send for doctor. Remove to cool place. Loosen clothing.
Apply ice in a cloth, or cloths wrung out of ice water to entire body.

Give NO STIMULANTS—NO WHISKEY OR BRANDY.


Toothache.

See dentist.

Hot applications. Iodine painted on gums. Oil of cloves on cotton in
tooth. (Be careful in using this.) (See Chapter XI.)


Warts.

Apply a “corn cure” containing “cannabis indica.” Nitric acid may be
applied, but it is so dangerous a poison that it is unsafe for children
to handle.


Wounds.

See “_Hemorrhage_” for deep, bleeding wounds.

If surface is scraped, as from a fall in sand, wash wound with hot
water (which has been boiled) and pure soap, such as Castile, and paint
with iodine. Fasten a sterile gauze compress in place over scraped
surface with a bandage or adhesive plaster.

See also “Cuts,” “Powder Wounds.”

FOOTNOTES:

[J] Use one of the proprietary (patent) preparations of castor oil,
pleasant to taste.

[K] A compress is several thicknesses of gauze or other clean material.

[L] If to the onion is added a tbsp. or two of water, a tbsp. vinegar
(and olive oil, if desired), pepper and salt, it will be found a
palatable salad with bread and butter, and will be liked by most
children.

[M] See List of Medicines No. 22.

[N] A tourniquet (pronounced turn-e-ket) is a constricting band used to
stop bleeding. Usually a triangular bandage is folded into cravat form
(see page 83) and tied loosely about the limb; then twisted as shown in
this picture. A rubber band, necktie, garter or a piece of rope may be
used in emergency.

[O] _Poison._

[P] Mothers who find it difficult to keep children from scratching this
rash at night may cover hands with small triangular bandages.




PLASTERS, POULTICES AND STUPES


Moist heat, in the form of plasters, poultices, and stupes, is more
penetrating than dry heat, and is often employed in cases of severe
inflammation.

Mustard plasters are in such common use that it seems unnecessary to
mention their value as counter-irritants.

_To Make a Mustard Plaster._—For an adult, mix together in the
proportion of 1 tbsp. mustard and 3 or 4 tbsp. flour, and rub into a
smooth paste with _warm_ water—not _hot_ or _cold_ water.

For a child, use from 4 to 6 tbsp. flour to ½ tbsp. mustard.

Spread the paste on muslin, turning each edge over about an inch. Cover
with gauze or a piece of thin muslin.

To prevent blistering, it is well to add beaten white of egg in making
the plaster, and to anoint the skin with vaseline or olive oil before
applying the plaster.

After removing plaster (in about fifteen minutes), cover skin with thin
muslin.

If much inflamed, apply olive oil or vaseline.

       *       *       *       *       *

Flaxseed is the favorite material for making a poultice, because the
oil in the seed retains heat longer than most other materials.

_To Make a Flaxseed Poultice._—Into a cup of boiling water, stir as
much ground flaxseed as it will “take up.” Spread on muslin; fold edges
over one inch or more, and cover with one layer of gauze. Poultice is
applied as hot as possible to the surface. Replace in one hour.

A bread poultice is made by laying a slice of bread in a sieve, and
pouring hot water over it. It is placed on muslin and applied direct.

Poultices are not used as much as they were a number of years ago, but
stupes give such relief to pain in the abdomen that mention should be
made of the

_Turpentine Stupe._—To 1 pint boiling water, add 2 tsp. oil of
turpentine. Dip a large piece of flannel into this. Wring out by
twisting in a towel—lay wet flannel in center of towel, fold edges of
towel over the flannel and twist ends of towel until the flannel is
quite dry. Apply hot! Cover with a large dry towel. Watch that it does
not blister. Anoint with vaseline or olive oil before applying stupe if
skin is very sensitive.

An easier method is to mix together equal parts oil of turpentine and
olive oil. Heat by setting the cup containing the mixture in very hot
water. Apply by rubbing. Cover with woolen cloth wrung out of hot
water, as described above.




LIST OF REMEDIES FOR THE HOME MEDICINE CLOSET


In every home there should be a certain closet or shelf high above
_little_ children’s reach, where the medicines and articles needed in
emergencies are kept. Among these should be found, plainly labeled, the
following:

     1. Tincture of Iodine.
     2. Aromatic Spirit of Ammonia.
     3. Boric Acid Powder.
     4. Stearate of Zinc.
     5. Pure Alcohol.
     6. Lime Water.
     7. Carron Oil.
     8. Epsom Salt.
     9. Soda-Mint-and-Pepsin Tablets.
    10. Baking Soda.
    11. Household Ammonia.
    12. Adhesive (Zinc Oxide) Plaster.
    13. Tube Vaseline.
    14. Capsicum Vaseline.
    15. Peroxide of Hydrogen.
    16. Castor Oil.
    17. Witch Hazel.
    18. Essence of Ginger.
    19. Syrup of Ipecac.
    20. Spirit of Camphor.
    21. Sweet Spirit of Nitre.
    22. Boric Acid Ointment.
    23. Powdered Alum.
    24. Borax.
    25. Spiced Syrup of Rhubarb.
    26. Picric Acid Gauze.
    27. Aromatic Smelling Salts.
    28. Oil of Cloves.
    29. Normal Salt Solution.
    30. Powdered Mustard.
    31. Essence of Peppermint.
    32. Tincture of Arnica.
    33. Oil of Turpentine.
    34. Aseptic Absorbent Cotton.
    35. Sterile Gauze.
    36. Triangular Bandages.
    37. Roller Bandages.
    38. Rubber Ear Syringe.
    39. Fountain Syringe.
    40. Measuring Glass.
    41. Eye Dropper.
    42. Hot-Water Bottle.

For description of the above remedies and dosage, see the following
pages.

IMPORTANT NOTE.—All bottles containing medicines which are poisonous
when swallowed, such as iodine, should be labeled with red ink and
should be tied with a rag about the neck, in order that even in the
dark, no mistake may be made.

_Read labels three times_ before giving or taking medicine:

    Before taking from closet;

    Before measuring dose;

    Before giving to patient.

Have amount given for a dose written on each label.


MEASURES.

    30 drops      ½ tsp. (teaspoon)
    60 drops      1 tsp., or 1 dram.
     2 tsp.       1 dessertspoon.
     4 tsp.       1 tbsp. (tablespoon)
     1 tbsp.      ½ ounce.
     2 tbsp.      1 ounce.


1. Tincture of Iodine.

(One ounce in a large-mouthed glass-stoppered bottle.)

_This should be in every household_ and every member above ten years
of age should know where it is kept. Any open wound or cut should be
immediately touched with this antiseptic.

Iodine is a _poison_ if swallowed, but is the best household remedy
in cases of cuts or wounds. It should be applied to such injuries
immediately, for it destroys germs. Iodine may be applied direct by
pouring on wound; or with a small wad of absorbent cotton fastened to a
toothpick.

If iodine is swallowed by accident, give cornstarch and water, or
boiled starch, or bread softened in water.

To take iodine stains out of materials, use strong household ammonia.


2. Aromatic Spirit of Ammonia.

(One ounce in glass-stoppered bottle.)

Dose:

    Children, 10 drops in ¼ glass of water.

    Grown people, ½ tsp. in ¼ glass of water.

Dose may be safely repeated every hour for several hours.

This is used for nervousness, headaches, indigestion, fainting, etc.

(Remember that an unconscious person cannot swallow, so do not give an
unconscious person medicine, for it may cause choking.)


3. Boric Acid Powder.

(One-half pound.)

Boric acid is not an acid, but a simple harmless alkali.

Useful in solution as a mouth wash; also for stings and for sore eyes.
Dissolve as much as possible in a cup of freshly boiled water. For sore
eyes, use in an eye-dropper or an eye-cup. It is both harmless and
safe. Sometimes the dry powder is dusted on the blistered surface of
a burn to dry blisters. Talcum powders contain a great deal of boric
acid, which is cooling and healing.


4. Compound Stearate of Zinc.

(One ounce.)

A simple, excellent dusting powder for skin irritations.


5. Pure Alcohol.

(One pint in glass-stoppered bottle. The glass stopper prevents
evaporation.)

Useful for bathing in case of fever—to reduce temperature. Dip needle
into alcohol before taking a splinter out—to “sterilize” or remove
germs from needle. If iodine becomes too strong because of evaporation,
add a little pure alcohol.

NOTE.—“Wood” alcohol is a poison, sometimes causing blindness; even
used for bathing, it injures the eyes.

“Denatured” alcohol is a poison.


6. Lime Water.

(Five cents’ worth.)

Dose: 1 to 2 tbsp. or more in water or milk.

Used for acid indigestion, for poisoning from acids, and in making
carron oil.


7. Carron Oil.

(One-half pint.)

Carron oil is excellent for burns. It may be purchased at the drug
store, or made by shaking together in a bottle equal parts of linseed
oil and lime water; for instance: one-quarter cup linseed oil, one
quarter cup lime water.


8. Epsom Salt.

(One-half pound.)

Useful as a laxative.

Dose: 1 tsp. to 1 tbsp. in a glass of water.

To relieve the skin in ivy poisoning, dissolve as much Epsom salt as
possible in a quarter cup boiled water. When cool, bathe skin and allow
to dry in the air.


9. Soda-Mint-and-Pepsin Tablets.

A simple remedy for indigestion.


10. Baking Soda (Bicarbonate of Soda).

(Two ounces in a box or glass.)

Useful in solution in case of scalds or burns, and stings of insects.

For indigestion: dose ½ tsp. in ½ glass hot water.


11. Household Ammonia.

(Label, “POISON.”)

In case of fainting, hold a little distance from patient’s nose. Useful
for stings of insects.


12. Adhesive (Zinc Oxide) Plaster.

(One yard, one-half inch wide.)

Useful for holding dressings in place or for fastening end of bandages,
etc.; for support in sprains in place of bandages; for strapping a cut,
but should _not_ be used to _cover_ a cut or wound.


13. Tube Vaseline.

Useful for burns, chapped hands, granulated eyelids. Do _not_ put
vaseline on _fresh_ cuts or wounds.

If a glass stopper is oiled with vaseline, it will not “stick” fast.


14. Tube Capsicum Vaseline.

Used for stiff neck, and in place of mustard plaster when only a mild
irritant is needed.


15. Peroxide of Hydrogen.

(Four ounces.)

Do not use on cuts! Cotton saturated with peroxide of hydrogen will
generally stop severe nosebleed. Used sometimes for burns. Keep bottle
in a _dark_ closet; it deteriorates in the light.

NOTE.—Peroxide of hydrogen is recommended by State Boards of Health as
a protection against Infantile Paralysis. Use as a spray for nose and
throat, or as a gargle, in the proportion of one part peroxide to three
parts water.


16. Castor Oil.

(Two ounces.)

Dose: Children, 1 to 2 tsp.; adults, 1 to 2 tbsp.

A mild purgative, clearing the intestines of undigested food in case of
acute indigestion.

It may be given in capsules; or one of the patent (“proprietary”)
preparations may be given. There are one or two of these which are not
at all unpleasant to take. An easy method of taking castor oil: hold
a piece of ice in the mouth before taking; and after, rinse the mouth
with ice water.


17. Witch Hazel.

(Ten cents’ worth.)

For sprains, stings, bites of insects.

Best applied in wet compress.


18. Essence, or Tincture, or Spirit of (Jamaica) Ginger.

(One ounce.)

Dose: ½ tsp. in a tbsp. hot water. Less for children.

For colic and indigestion.


19. Syrup of Ipecac.

(Two ounces.)

Dose: As expectorant, 5 to 10 drops; as emetic, 1 tsp. to 1 tbsp.,
according to age.

Used as an emetic—to produce vomiting—in croup, in cases of poisoning,
etc.

Useful in small doses in bronchitis and asthma.


20. Spirit of Camphor.

(Two ounces.)

This may be made by pouring pure alcohol on pure gum camphor.

It is useful for colds when they first appear. Dose: 2 drops on a tsp.
sugar.

Excellent for mosquito bites.


21. Sweet Spirit of Nitre.

(Two ounces.)

Dose:

    Children, 3 to 10 drops in ¼ glass of water.

    Adults, 20 drops to 1 tsp. in ¼ glass of water.

For fever and colds. Apply to fever blisters (cold sores) to allay
inflammation.


22. Boric Acid Ointment.

Excellent for fever blisters (cold sores). Made by rubbing 1 tbsp.
boric acid powder into 1 tsp. vaseline.


23. Powdered Alum.

(One ounce.)

Useful for bleeding gums, canker spots, as a gargle in sore throat, etc.

Dissolve a tsp. in a glass of water.


24. Borax.

(One pound.)

Useful as a gargle or mouth wash—one tsp. in a glass of water; or as a
deodorant of perspiration, and for general cleansing purposes.


25. Spiced Syrup of Rhubarb.

(Two ounces.)

Dose:

    Children ½ to 1 tsp.
    Adults 2 tsp.

For pain in abdomen, indigestion, diarrhea.


26. Picric Acid Gauze.

(One small package.)

This is excellent as a compress for burns, but it leaves a stain on
clothing which cannot be removed.


27. Aromatic Smelling Salts.

Inhaled for faintness, headache, etc.


28. Oil of Cloves.

(One-half ounce.)

For toothache. Saturate a piece of cotton and pack in the tooth after
cleaning out the cavity. Cover with dry cotton.


29. Normal Salt Solution.

Excellent for burns.

To make: Add 1 level tsp. table salt to 1 pint water which has boiled
20 minutes. Do not use more salt than directions call for.


30. Mustard (Powdered).

(One-quarter pound.)

One tsp. in a glass of lukewarm water will cause vomiting. Useful as an
emetic in cases of poisoning, and in form of mustard plaster.


31. Essence of Peppermint.

(Two ounces.)

Dose:

    Children, 3 to 10 drops in ¼ glass of water.
    Adults, 10 to 20 drops in ¼ glass of water.

For colic, flatulence (gas), heart-burn.

Sometimes used externally for slight burns.


32. Tincture of Arnica.

(Four ounces.)

Applied externally as a remedy for strains, sprains, and bruises.


33. Oil of Turpentine.

(Two ounces.)

Useful for chilblains, and in “stupes.” See Ready Reference List, page
136.

(Buy this at the drug store—it is not the kind used in paint.)


34. Aseptic (Sterile) Absorbent Cotton.

(Small package.)

“Aseptic” means clean, or free from germs. Keep clean in package,
opening end only as needed. Throw away all used cotton.


35. Sterile Gauze.

(Buy a one-yard package at the drug store. Keep it wrapped.)

“Sterile” means clean in a medical sense—free from germs. Do not
handle. Hands are seldom clean in a medical sense. Never use old rags
or pieces of handkerchiefs unless freshly laundered, but if possible
use sterile gauze for wrapping cuts or wounds.


36. Triangular Bandages.

The triangular bandage is the bandage used for first-aid emergencies.

The roller bandages are for more permanent use.

It is most convenient to have on hand one of the Red Cross First Aid
Outfits, the contents of which are so packed as to keep them free from
dust.

The simplest of these outfits contains all material necessary in
ordinary household accidents:

    A triangular muslin bandage.
    A gauze bandage.
    Two safety pins.

On the triangular bandage are printed pictures showing the way in which
it is used. (See Chapter XIII.)

To a gauze bandage a pad of gauze is sewed. This pad may be tied over a
wound without being touched with the hands.

The safety pins are to hold bandages in place, but a stitch is better.


37. Roller Bandages.

In addition to the above, in every medicine closet there should be:

  Three gauze roller bandages, 1 inch wide (for bandaging fingers).
  Three gauze roller bandages, 2½ inches wide (for bandaging arms, etc.).

It is best to buy roller bandages, wrapped ready for use, at the drug
store. Never use a wet bandage, for it shrinks as it dries, and stops
free circulation of the blood. (See Chapter XVI.)


38. Rubber Ear Syringe.


39. Fountain Syringe.

[Illustration: GRADUATE MEASURING GLASS]


40. Graduate Measuring Glass, marked with dosage—teaspoonful,
tablespoonful.

[Illustration: EYE DROPPER]


41. Eye Dropper, which can be used to drop medicine.


42. Hot-Water Bottle.


While this list of contents of the Home Medicine Closet may seem long,
the cost is but little, and the timely use of some of the remedies may
prevent serious illness and save doctors’ bills.




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber’s note:

Obvious punctuation errors were corrected. However, many times the
text goes straight from dialogue to instruction, and a closing
quotation mark is absent.

Page 74, “tinest” changed to “tiniest” (tiniest real ones)

Page 87, “blame” changed to “blamed” (you will be blamed)

Page 131, “Gentle” changed to “Gently” (Gently massage or)



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MARY FRANCES FIRST AID BOOK***


******* This file should be named 54216-0.txt or 54216-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/4/2/1/54216


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

