The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Woodcraft Girls at Camp, by Lillian
Elizabeth Roy


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The Woodcraft Girls at Camp


Author: Lillian Elizabeth Roy



Release Date: November 3, 2014  [eBook #47279]

Language: English


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WOODCRAFT GIRLS AT CAMP***


E-text prepared by Juliet Sutherland, MWS, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 47279-h.htm or 47279-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/47279/47279-h/47279-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/47279/47279-h.zip)


Transcriber's note:

      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).





THE WOODCRAFT GIRLS AT CAMP

by

LILLIAN ELIZABETH ROY


[Illustration: WATCHING THE SWALLOW'S FLIGHT.

  _The Woodcraft Girls at Camp_.      _Frontispiece_.]


THE WOODCRAFT GIRLS AT CAMP

by

LILLIAN ELIZABETH ROY

Author of
The Woodcraft Girls in the City,
Little Woodcrafter's Book,
The Polly Brewster Books, etc.

Illustrated







[Illustration]

New York
Grosset & Dunlap
Publishers

Copyright, 1916,
By George H. Doran Company

Printed in the United States of America




 Sincere gratitude is tendered Mrs. Frederick Hoisington
 (Atma), of Woodcraft Indians, for valuable suggestions
            and her friendly assistance in
            making this story one of true
                Woodcraft life of the
                      beginner.




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                                        PAGE

      One  The Chosen Land                                         13

      Two  Choosing a Camp Site                                    37

    Three  Discovery of the "Thinkerator"                          59

     Four  Tribulations of the Campers                             80

     Five  Some Amazing Things in Nature                          100

      Six  The Mutiny of Nita                                     120

    Seven  Winners in Home-Cook and Mokodasso-Winini Degrees      137

    Eight  What Happened During a Thunder Storm                   155

     Nine  Wickee and Cheokee Join the Camp                       181

      Ten  The Letter that Saved Nita                             207

   Eleven  Star Gazing from Pine Nob                              236

   Twelve  Nita's Escapade and Reformation                        255

 Thirteen  A Birthday Party in Camp                               273

 Fourteen  Rainy Days and Woodcraft Lore                          290

  Fifteen  The Thunder Bird Speaks                                313

  Sixteen  The Council Fire Burns out the Dross                   330




THE WOODCRAFT GIRLS AT CAMP




CHAPTER ONE

THE CHOSEN LAND


"Ooo-ooh! Oo-ooh! Nita!" called Suzanne Baker, as she skipped across
the small square of green grass that individualised the brownstone
house where Anita Brampton lived.

No answer came, so Zan--as she was always called for short--impatiently
repeated the call, adding after a moment's pause, "Where are you--come
on out!"

Still no reply, but the pretty face of Mrs. Brampton appeared at the
glass door inside the vestibule. She smiled as she recognised the
caller and nodded for her to come in.

Zan ran up the steps and said, "How'd do, Mrs. Brampton--where's Nita?"

"Looking for you, most likely," laughed the lady of the house. Then, as
her smile changed to a petulant look with the changing of her thought,
she added, "Dear me! Nita is a sore trial. Did you ever know her to
accomplish anything without confusion to others?"

Zan knew from experience that that aggrieved tone meant a long harangue
on Nita's shortcomings, so she hurriedly changed the subject.

"Well, as long as Nita isn't here I guess I'll run along to Miss
Miller's. They'll all be there waiting, I s'pose."

"All right, dearie; I have a little bridge party in the library, or I
would give more time to you," replied Mrs. Brampton, daintily patting
down a few stray wisps of blonde hair that fluttered in the breeze from
the open door.

"Oh, I'm in a great hurry, anyway," returned Zan, starting out of the
doorway.

At that moment, a maid summoned Mrs. Brampton to the telephone saying
that her daughter wished to speak with her.

"Wait a moment, Zan--Nita's on the 'phone and you can speak to her
after I see what she wants," said Mrs. Brampton, turning back.

Zan followed to the small nook where the telephone was kept and stood
waiting. Laughter and the sound of coins drew her attention to the
bridge players in the large library.

Mrs. Brampton finished speaking with her daughter, saying, "Zan is
here--wait a second and I'll put her on the wire."

Turning to hand Zan the receiver, she whispered, "When you are through
here run to the dining-room and have a glass of wine and cake--it is
all ready for my friends."

"Oh, no, thank you, Mrs. Brampton! You know Daddy doesn't approve of
us having wine. We always drink water at home," replied Zan, flushing
uncomfortably.

"Dear me, I forgot! The doctor is _such_ a radical on these little
things!" laughed the lady merrily, patting the girl consolingly on the
shoulder with much-beringed hands.

She hastened back to her guests while Zan called, "Hello, Nita! Where
are you, anyway?"

"Ha, ha ha! We're all at Miss Miller's? Why don't you hurry over, too,"
came a musical voice over the wire.

"Just because you didn't do as I said! I told you distinctly to wait
for me at the school-gates. You knew I'd be a few minutes late on
account of seeing my Latin teacher after school. I asked Bob if he had
seen you--he was waiting for some boys in front of the gate--but he
said you had hurried away with the girls. So I stopped in here thinking
you may have gone home."

There was a moment's silence, then a petulant voice, so like Mrs.
Brampton's that Zan smiled, said, "Dear me! I'm sure it isn't my fault
if you didn't meet us! Why all of the girls should bother to hang
around waiting for you, is more than I can tell!"

"Well, seeing that the whole plan is mine, and not one of you girls
would have been in on it if I hadn't asked you, it seems mighty
ungrateful to act so, that's all I have to say!" and Zan jabbed up the
receiver on its hook.

She threw a glance of disapproval at the card players who were
quarrelling over the stakes, and hurried out, leaving the maid to close
the doors.

A few moments later she was on a cross-town car. Thinking of the house
she had just left, with its mistress dressed in silks and sparkling
with jewels, she murmured to herself, "Huh! I'd a heap rather have our
comfy home with all the boys' marks and scratches on the mission wood
than all of the gorgeous damask and gilt of Nita's home! We enjoy our
life at home, but gracious! at Nita's it's always, 'Don't touch that,
dearie!' or 'Be careful, that vase cost a fortune;' a girl can't even
skip over the floor without having Mrs. Brampton cry, 'Oh, mercy! That
velour carpet will all be worn out!'"

The conductor, in passing down the aisle heard the girl mutter and
stopped to ask her if she spoke to him.

Zan laughed amiably as she looked up at him and said, "No, I was just
thinking out loud!"

The man smiled too, and returned to his post while Zan looked out of
the window to see what street they were near. Finding that the next
corner was the one she wished to reach, she signalled to stop the car.

As she stood on the platform waiting for the car to come to a stop, the
kind old conductor said, "Not many young folks think at all, but it is
best to do your thinking quiet-like so others don't get a chance to
hear your plans. S'pose every inventor did his thinking aloud, what
chance would he have to get his patent?"

Zan nodded thoughtfully and thanked the wise old man for the advice. He
assisted her to jump down and smiled as he watched her hurry down the
side street.

As she went, Zan thought, "That man is a philosopher! I must be careful
and not think out loud after this. Thinking is good practice but I
guess it all depends on what kind of thinking you do--good--bad--or
indifferent!"

With this sage conclusion Zan reached Miss Miller's home. She asked the
elevator boy to take her up to Apartment 9, and, as soon as the floor
was reached, she bounded out and rang the bell at the side of the door.

Of the five girls about to meet for the forming of a Clan of Woodcraft
Indians, no two were alike in character or physique. Zan was of the
tom-boy type, fond of athletics and all out-door sport with her two
brothers, who were near her own age. Her hands and feet, although being
well-shaped, were large and tanned. The finely poised head was crowned
with a mass of bronze-red hair that had no hint of wave in its long
strands. Energy, endurance, and impatience were expressed in her every
movement and expression while sympathy, generosity, and frankness were
the attributes that go hand in hand with such a temperament as Zan's.
Her parents were most sensible and clothed the girl in comfortable,
well-made things of first-class material, but ignored ridiculous styles
or customs which might distract an expanding thought from practical
affairs and limit it to fashion and self-contemplation. Of course, Zan
had never worn stays, tight shoes, or cramping gloves, and was given
wholesome food with no indulgence in the kind that impedes digestion
or causes fermentation to blood and brain. As a result, the girl
possessed a normal, perfectly healthy body, clear eyes, wonderful skin,
and looked like fourteen years of age instead of twelve, the last
birthday having been celebrated a few weeks previously to the opening
of this story. In school, she was in the class of girls where each one
registered thirteen and a half to fourteen years of age. And she was
generally at the head of her class, at that.

Anita Brampton was the most decided contrast to Zan of all the
school-mates. She was just past fourteen but so under-sized and slender
that she looked like twelve, albeit, she was most sophisticated in
life, and made the most of her dainty prettiness. Her great eyes
of blue, so like a wax-doll's, were used to their best advantage,
while her graceful little body generally posed effectively. Her pale
yellow hair was artificially curled about a pink and white face, not
altogether free from some of her mother's powder and rouge. Her hands
and feet were too small and the rose-bud mouth too petulant for beauty.
But Nita had absolute faith in her perfection. She was most indolent
and over-fond of sweets and dancing; in fact, the latter art was
indulged to such an extent that it became a crime. She attended every
party she could secure an invitation to and, being a graceful dancer
always dressed in the latest mode, she never lacked partners. These
youths, several years her senior, vied with each other for her daring
words and suggestive glances, yet not one of them would care to have
her for an intimate friend of his sister's. As a result of wasting the
night hours, Nita was delicate, nervous and prematurely blasé, when she
should have been most vital and abounding with fine health.

Elena Marsh was a pretty girl with a yearning for the artistic. She was
clever with brush and pen and promised to accomplish something worth
while if a well-meaning but over-severe mother could be made to see the
blight she forced on the girl's ambitions. To Mrs. Marsh, success was
found through tiresome ways of practice for hours, when fingers grew to
cramped to firmly grasp a pencil. She never realised that inspiration
often came from absolute change of occupation. Then too, she was so
fearful of fresh air, or athletics, that she actually kept Elena cooped
up like a hot-house flower.

Jane Hubert was a dark-complexioned type, impulsive, opinionated,
intelligent. Jane and her twin-brother Jack were indulged by wealthy
parents who threatened to spoil their promising future unless some
kind interference occurred. The Huberts had an Adirondack camp where
the twins had found great sport in out-door life, and thus Jane had
acquired an intense love of taking pictures. She had a splendid camera
and was quite expert in developing and printing pictures.

Hilda Alvord was a generous, good-natured girl with no claim to beauty
or wealth, but her perfect health and optimism gave her a pleasing
expression which attracted friends much quicker than Nita's petulant
beauty. Hilda's father had passed away when Brother was but a few
weeks old. Mrs. Alvord was left with the two children but no means
with which to provide for them. It was necessary that something be
done immediately, so Dr. Baker, the family physician, advised her to
take charge of a case of his where patience and motherly care were
more important than trained nursing. Mrs. Alvord acquitted herself
so well that she found all the nursing she could accept thereafter.
This left the care of the baby to Hilda, as well as most of the light
house-keeping. The stress of circumstances never worried Hilda however,
and she was a great favourite with the school-girls and teachers.
She was an ardent worshipper of Nature and anything in plant-life or
flowers secured her entire attention. The windows of the modest rooms
where the Alvords lived, were always a tangle of riotous bloom and
vines.

As Zan rang the bell of Miss Miller's apartment, a bevy of laughing
girls ran to open the door. Miss Miller stood in the doorway of the
living-room smiling as they all escorted Zan to greet their hostess.

"Thank goodness, you're here at last! We're all crazy to get down to
brass tacks!" cried Hilda, the apostle of slang.

"'Tisn't my fault if I'm late--ask Nita what kind of date she made then
went ahead and broke it!" pouted Zan angrily.

"Well, you're here, so let the mistake pass," said Hilda.

Miss Miller had seated herself at the desk while the girls selected
comfortable seats and waited for her to begin.

"Zan, we were wondering whether the Adirondack plan is the best for
all concerned. Just before you arrived, Nita was saying that she
wouldn't go to any poky camp near home. She has set her heart on the
Adirondacks, it seems."

Zan turned in amazement toward Nita. "Why, you told me that you'd be
glad to go anywhere as long as you could get away from your mother's
nagging!"

The girls laughed, and Miss Miller had to bite her lip to keep from
smiling at Zan's frank manner of telling the truth.

"Oh, that was before Jane's brother told me about the Adirondacks. They
had a camp there last summer, you know, and he says that it's loads of
fun 'cause so many people camp about the same water, or lake, and every
evening they have dancing, or parties, or moon-light outings," replied
Nita, undisturbed by Zan's bluntness.

"That's what _he_ said, just because he thought we were going back
there this summer and it would be fun for him to have you there to
go around with. But father changed his mind this week, and has leased
a cottage at the sea-shore instead. Jack wouldn't be so eloquent over
the mountains if you should ask him now!" said Jane, who disapproved of
Nita's winning ways with her twin.

Nita said nothing, but thought over the unexpected news.

"Well, any one else got a kick coming?" asked Zan, impatiently.

The girls giggled for they well knew that at school Miss Miller would
have reprimanded such slang.

No further remarks were heard in complaint, so Miss Miller asked Zan if
she had any news to place before them; if not they would discuss the
advantage of camping in mountains or country near by.

"Yes, I have!" retorted Zan, emphatically. "I asked the crowd to meet
here so's I could tell you all what Daddy offered us this noon. He says
we can have Wickeecheokee Farm for our very own all summer if we want
it!"

Zan sprung her news with an air of having delivered an all-inclusive
reason for accepting the farm offer at once. The faces about her proved
that the news did not create the joy she looked for.

"Say, what's the matter with that! Isn't it great?" cried she,
impatiently.

"Who wants to camp on a farm?" said Nita, derisively.

"You were crazy to go there last summer--since when have you changed
your mind?" asked Zan, frowning.

"A camp's not a camp unless it is the wilderness, and you certainly
can't claim _that_ for your old farm," pouted Nita.

"My dears, I wish to say a word about the offer," interceded Miss
Miller. "I think the doctor's offer at this opportune time is splendid!
Hilda was saying just before you came in, Zan, that she didn't see
where she could earn enough money to pay her fare to the Adirondacks
and back this summer. And Mrs. Marsh won't consent to Elena's going
so far away. She's worried for fear Elena will become ill and need
her. Then, too, girls, I would rather not spend so much of my salary
on car-fare this season, as I have had extra expenses to carry for my
mother's illness this spring."

"Have you thought of anything else, Miss Miller?" asked Jane, who
seemed to be as pleased with Zan's idea as any other.

"Not yet, for Zan told me this noon before school that she had a place
just made to order for us. Woods, water, gardens and all that heart
could desire! I suspected the location of this Eden so did not try to
find anything else until after this meeting."

"If Elena's mother doesn't want her to go too far off, the farm will be
just the place for her," said Zan.

"But, Zan, I don't want mother popping in on us all summer just as we
get interested in swimming or climbing. She'd make me come out of the
water and roll myself in hot blankets to keep off a chill!" complained
Elena, dolorously.

The girls laughed sympathetically, for they all knew of Mrs. Marsh's
fears and foibles.

"No danger of your mother dropping in that way," giggled Zan. "Our farm
is a hundred and fifty miles from here, on a branch of an old-time
railroad. When you reach the last station you still have to ride ten
miles in a springless wagon over rough roads. Ha, ha! I see any of your
mothers anxious to visit you after that!"

"_I'd_ be glad to go there, for you know the saying, 'beggars can't be
choosers,'" said Hilda.

"I'll go anywhere the rest of you go," added Jane.

"Then, taking Zan's word for our seclusion, I'll agree too," said
Elena, eagerly.

"And I have already agreed with pleasure," came from Miss Miller.

"It goes without saying, that _I_ am all for the farm," said Zan,
looking at Nita for her answer.

"I don't suppose I have any choice in the matter! As long as all of you
have voted against me, I shall have to accept your verdict," whined
Nita.

"You don't have to do anything of the sort! You can join a crowd
of girls who all want to do just what you do--fool away the whole
summer on dancing or flirting. _We're_ not going in for that kind of
a riot, and you can just make up your mind to having a good old rest
and all-round country life, if you chum with us!" came from Zan, in
emphatic tones.

"I don't know why you always pick on me, Zan! I declare, any one would
think you had a special grudge against me," cried Nita, plaintively.

"Pooh! Nita, you know just as well as I do that I have to talk to you
straight out from the shoulder to put any sort of go into you! Dad says
he thinks you'd fade away entirely if it wasn't for my pep!" retorted
Zan, then turning to Miss Miller with an air that closed the foregoing
incident:

"Have you any papers or books here about the Woodcrafters?"

"Yes, Zan, I'll run and get them. Meantime, suppose you girls indite a
letter to the doctor and thank him for the generous offer of the farm,"
said Miss Miller, glad of an excuse to get out of the room while the
letter was under discussion.

"Then you are all set on that farm?" queried Nita.

"Why, sure! Did you dream anything else?" asked Hilda.

"I'll have to give in too, I s'pose!" sighed Nita.

Zan sent her a glance that was wasted, so she shrugged her shoulders as
she took up a sheet of paper and a pen.

The letter of thanks was carefully written and given to Zan to deliver
to her father that night. This matter disposed of, Miss Miller spread
out the papers she had brought from her room.

"Girls, to tell the truth, I am greatly relieved to know we will start
our experiment where we can secure 'ready aid' if necessary. I almost
regretted my offer to take you to camp this summer when I had time to
think of all it entailed. But the farm will be just the place for us to
get acquainted with each other's home-characteristics and, at the same
time, permit us to provide a balance in our treasury for a mountain
camp next summer. By that time we ought to have a Tribe of twenty or
more members, I should think," said Miss Miller, with a sigh.

The teacher was a wise trainer of girls and realised that a word
pro or con would settle the question for all season regarding any
dissatisfaction in selecting the camping ground. If the girls thought
they would have to choose between giving up the delightful camp-plan
or accept the farm, naturally they would take the farm. Then, too,
she knew that abstract ideas would not have the same impression as
actual facts, so she took a package of kodak pictures taken at the
farm, and passed them to the girls. Exclamations of delight, surprise,
and anticipation were the result. Even Nita felt a semblance to mild
enthusiasm as she looked at the beautiful scenes of woods, rocks,
water-falls and streams.

"Now, suppose we make notes of what will be needed for the summer in
camp," suggested Miss Miller, after a short time. "I am going to take
my butterfly-net and outfit so that you girls can make similar ones and
collect some of the beautiful creatures. Then, too, I have ordered a
bead-loom for a model, and as soon as we have each made a loom, we will
begin weaving head-bands and the trimmings for our robes. But these
are items to be classed later; we must start on necessities first, and
art second, I suppose."

"My goodness! That reminds me, Miss Miller! I almost forgot the most
important point in Dad's offer! He says we can use anything in the
house that we want, besides the vegetables and fruit of the gardens.
The boys had some tents last summer when they took a trip with Dad up
the Delaware River. Two are in good order and Bob says the three cots
are O. K. as long as we are not too particular about mattresses. Muzzer
told me we could have any dishes or kitchen utensils we might need, as
well as the pickles and preserves from the cellar."

"Why, Zan! Why didn't you tell this before! I bet you wouldn't have
heard one dissenting word, with jam and jelly offered us," cried Hilda,
smacking her lips.

"Not only that, but just think of the expense we can save! Why, I think
it is just splendid!" added Miss Miller.

The others were delighted to a degree that gave Zan much pleasure, for
she loved to have her parents' generosity appreciated.

"After all that, maybe our letter to the doctor is tame?" ventured
Hilda.

"Oh, no! It's all right--I'll explain to them at home," replied Zan,
eager to continue the camp plans.

Miss Miller returned to the papers and Manual of Woodcraft Indians. She
read aloud the various items mentioned for the guidance of beginners,
and the girls made notes of things as the ideas appealed to them. The
teacher looked over the memos and read aloud:

"Extra tents--cots--material for costumes--shoes for hiking--one-piece
suit for swimming--blankets--duffle-bags--toilet articles," and the
numerous personal things girls would want during the summer.

"We can wear our gym suits at camp until we have made regular Woodcraft
robes," suggested Miss Miller.

"Yes, and we'll have a good opportunity to wear our last year's
sneakers and hiking shoes," added Jane.

"Oh! We'll save the sneakers for the tennis court!" exclaimed Zan,
suddenly.

"Tennis! Anything more down there on the farm to surprise us with?"
cried Hilda, eagerly.

"Sure! Did you think the boys and I spent several summers there doing
nothing? Why, we've got a dandy croquet ground, and a child's edition
of a golf course--limited!" laughed Zan, thinking of the area covered
by their golf.

"Zan had better not tell us of any more delights awaiting us or we will
not be content to take the balance of our examinations at school!"
advised Miss Miller, smiling.

"That wouldn't affect your reports of us at school," retorted Zan.

Miss Miller was physical culture teacher at the school the girls
attended and was a great favourite with all. She was an enthusiastic
advocate of outdoor life and was constantly urging her pupils to accept
the simple life of Nature.

At Zan's remark, she said earnestly, "Not my branch of school-work,
no! But the grand total in education for which I work, as a part of
the great machine, would be injured if I did not try to help you all
in your educational efforts. I believe that education is necessary to
elevate the race. You see, it is not a class that must be lifted and
benefited most, but the mass! In education of the individual we finally
embrace the universal. Thus, it depends upon each one of us to make
good--in school studies, at home, in camp--in fact, in every little
thing or thought!"

"We'll make good, all right, Miss Miller, as long as we have you to
show us how!" cried Hilda, admiringly.

"Yes, indeedy!" added Zan.

The latter part of the talk was far above Nita's head, but she had been
quietly thinking of other things. At the pause which followed Zan's
exclamation, she asked, "Is the car going to be sent down for us to
use, Zan?"

"Car! What for?" wondered Zan.

"Why, to get to the stores in the town and carry back our provisions,
of course! Then, too, we will want to see the country, won't we?" said
Nita, surprised.

"Ha! There isn't a store within ten miles, but 'most everything grows
right on the farm. A butcher calls twice a week, and eggs, butter,
milk, and chickens are provided by Bill," explained Zan.

"Bill! Who's Bill?" asked some of the girls eagerly.

"Why, Bill's the farmer, of course. He lives in the farmer's cottage
and looks after the place all winter, besides taking care of the
gardens, cow and chickens all the year round. He works the place on
shares in preference to a salary, and likes it first-rate, he says,"
replied Zan.

"Oh, we didn't know there was a resident farmer. When you mentioned
tennis and croquet, to say nothing of the golf-links, you failed to
give us a hint of farmer or wife," said Miss Miller.

"Well, I had my mind full of sports, you see, and I never class Bill as
a sport!" laughed Zan, the others joining her.

"What's he like?" queried Jane, while Nita added, "Has he any sons?"

"Nita thinks, 'better a farmer than no son at all!'" teased Hilda, for
Nita's preference for boys was no secret with the girls.

"Bill hasn't any family, but he will act as her escort if she needs a
drive about the country for her health!" laughed Zan. "Bill is slow and
staid, as well as lank and lean. He is forever twirling a wisp of grass
between his teeth while he is interviewing you. He swears by his wife's
judgment and his deepest concern is her 'rheumatics.' Mrs. Sherwood
complains of 'stiff jints' during winter and claims that this keeps
her from exercising enough to keep down extra flesh. Consequently, she
is as big and round as a balloon, and wheezes and gasps when she talks.
But they're all right, where good-nature and generosity is concerned,
and will do anything for us."

"I'm sure I wouldn't be seen going out with _such_ a freak!" cried
Nita, disdainfully.

"I don't believe Bill would take you, to tell the truth, Nita. He is
old-fashioned and doesn't favour French heels and low-necked dresses.
He is most orthodox and thinks such frills a sin and a breach of the
commandments!" laughed Zan.

"How will we reach the farm, Zan, if it is so far from the station and
no way to get there?" asked Elena, dubiously.

"Oh, Bill will get us there, even if he carries us in the old spring
wagon, which is preferable to the vehicle he used the first time we
ever visited the farm," exclaimed Zan, following her words with a
contagious laugh, rocking back and forth until the girls demanded to
know what caused her mirth.

"Oh, girls! If you could have stood on that platform as the boys and
I did, waiting for the 'carriage' that we expected to take us to the
farm! Never will I forget it as long as I live!"

Again Zan had to laugh so heartily that she was urged to share her
humour with her friends.

"Dad had been down to look over his wonderful 'suburban investment,'
as we called it then, and had been met at the train by Bill with his
buck-board. When we were ready to go, Bill was notified how many would
arrive. Nothing was to be seen as we jumped off the car and looked
about. Fields, fences, and a long stretch of railroad tracks, and back
of us a hundred yards or so, the tiny village. After a game of tag with
the boys, I spied something moving into sight over the brow of the
hill. I called Dad's attention to it and he declared it was our Jehu
and the taxi! Well! I wish some one had taken a snapshot of that rig!

"It was of the Noah's Ark type, and the nags to pull it had long since
celebrated their thirtieth birthday! We found out afterwards that
Dad ventured to warn Bill about driving safe horses and told him how
nervous Mrs. Baker was with young untrained steeds. Bill wanted to be
on the safe side, I guess, so he hooked up his plough-team. It took
us four hours to cover the ten miles! And when we finally got to the
house, we all ached from the jouncing and strain of holding to the
sides of the wagon."

"Good gracious! you don't expect us to ride in that thing!" cried Nita,
dismayed.

"Why not--it was good enough for me!" retorted Zan.

"No, she doesn't, Nita, for I heard the doctor telephone to the farm
asking some one to meet us with the spring cart, so I am afraid I shall
not have the experience that Zan had that first visit," laughed Miss
Miller, hoping to calm Nita's fear.

"Well, I'd rather stay home than ride and make a spectacle of myself
like that!" said Nita, disdainfully.

"There wasn't a single boy within ten miles to have seen you if you had
been there!" scorned Zan.

"Come, come, girls! Stop arguing and come back to business. There's
still much to decide," remonstrated Miss Miller.

"Yes, I agree with Miss Miller! What's next?" asked Jane.

Thereupon, the teacher read over the various pages of the Woodcraft
Manual, stopping often to suggest ideas, or tell the girls to make a
note on their pads.

"Besides these printed articles, we will need pads to take notes upon
when we go on a hike, or study birds and plants. Then, too, we must be
sure to take a good camera and win some _coups_ that way. Jane, you
have a fine one, maybe you can take yours. Elena, you must be sure
to take your paints and brushes, and Hilda will take her embroidery
things. We must try for all the degrees and _coups_ we can possibly
hope for this summer."

"Oh, Miss Miller! And I might try for a _coup_ in flowers, as I love
that work, and have been complimented on my good work!" exclaimed Hilda.

"Of course! Jane, make a note of taking plenty of blue print paper and
a frame," added the teacher.

"Hilda, be sure to pack your botany books! Between us, we ought to
identify lots of beautiful specimens and make a lovely book of our
prints!" cried Jane, thoroughly roused by the thought.

"Dear, dear! Can't some one think of a specialty in which we excel?"
asked Elena, anxiously.

"We each can win a _coup_ by knowing fifty wild flowers, and Hilda
might try for a grand _coup_ by finding a hundred. Then, we will all
try for _coups_ in knowing stars, butterflies, swimming, birds, and
other knowledge as set forth in the Manual," replied Miss Miller,
enthusiastically.

"Oh, pshaw! Why can't we start this week? I'm so crazy to begin I just
know I won't be able to concentrate on my school exams all through this
and next week!" sighed Jane.

"Then you'll lose a grand _coup_ in education! One must learn to use
self-control in all things. When school is over the reward will prove
all the sweeter for the hard work that preceded it," remonstrated Miss
Miller.

After other minor items had been noted, and the decision made for khaki
clothes for ordinary wear, to save the leather robe for ceremonial
occasions, the teacher could think of nothing more to be discussed at
that meeting. It was growing dark out of doors and lessons remained to
be studied that night, so she brought the first meeting to a close.

At dinner that evening, Zan presented her father with the letter
of thanks signed by the girls of the new Clan. He read it with
satisfaction and passed it over to his wife.

"I hope for great work this summer, Zan," ventured the doctor.

"You can't hope for more than we do," retorted Zan, gaily. "You just
ought to have been with us when we discussed the items needed for camp
work. Every one is crazy to begin--all except Nita."

"Humph! And she is the one I expect more from than all of you
combined!" said the doctor, thoughtfully.

"Oh, you know Nita, Dad! She'll want to leave the next day when she
finds there aren't any boys about to flirt with. And the very idea of
her helping at the camp work makes me laugh! If she lasts a full week,
I'll miss my guess!" replied Zan, tossing her bronze hair.

"Zan, do you want to do Dad a great favour?" asked the doctor,
anxiously.

"Now you know, Dad, I'd eat my head off for you!" cried Zan, throwing
her arms about her father's neck and squeezing him.

"Then watch your words and acts regarding Nita--be most considerate of
her and have patience! She is mentally diseased and no one realises
that she needs healing. This experience with four healthy-minded girls
may prove her salvation in after life. I am putting it up to you,
Zan, to see that your nursing of this peculiar invalid does not tend
to prolong the malady, but will nip the growth of the trouble in its
present stage. Perhaps a few months hence would be too late, and a
cure would be impossible. I rely on you, daughter, to help in this
cure!"

Zan's brothers, Frederick, nicknamed Fiji on account of his
unmanageable hair, and Bobs, short for Robert, had left the dining-room
to study their lessons. Mrs. Baker, the doctor and Zan remained, so
that an uninterrupted silence followed the serious words of the doctor.

Zan sighed heavily, and finally looked up at her father with a bright
smile. "I'll do it, if it takes all the spice out of camp-life!"

The doctor smiled as he replied, "It won't, Zan! In fact, you'll have
all the better fun for knowing in your own heart that you are doing a
duty as well as pleasing your Dad!"

"And while the boys and I are enjoying the days at the beach, I will
feel happier than otherwise, to know you are showing your companions
what real joy and contentment means when found in natural out-door
living," added Mrs. Baker.




CHAPTER TWO

CHOOSING A CAMP SITE


Boxes were shipped, tents and cots had been sent, and the hundred and
one last items always remembered on the day of departure had been
attended to, when Miss Miller met her five charges at the Pennsylvania
Terminal, where they expected to take a train to reach the junction
in New Jersey. At Junction they would have to change and take a local
train before arriving at the insignificant station ten miles from
Wickeecheokee Farm.

As the train whizzed by well-cultivated farms, magnificent estates,
and later, through beautiful, wooded hills, fertile valleys, and over
sparkling waters, the bevy of eager girls exclaimed delightedly at
every new scene. A recent shower had cleared the atmosphere, and the
verdure shone a brilliant green in the bright sunshine. Birds soared
high above tree-tops, singing joyously, while cattle moved leisurely,
grazing over the pastures seen in passing.

"Oh, my, but it feels good to be out of the hot dusty city!" sighed
Jane, leaning back in the seat and inhaling the fragrant air.

"Yes, I can actually think--away from trolleys and rumble of trucks,"
added Zan, pensively.

"That's a novelty for you!" teased Hilda, smiling.

"I can hardly believe my eyes! It seems too good to be true--a whole
summer with no one to pester you about sickness!" said Elena, with
relief expressed on her face.

Miss Miller smiled, but she wondered what the mothers would think
if they but knew how glad their girls were to get away from nagging
foolish worry. How much better to recognise in each girl of their age a
certain amount of responsibility for themselves, and guide by example
or suggestion, instead of demands or coercion.

"Next station is Junction--change cars for all stops on the Rahway
River branch!" shouted a brakeman from the platform.

"So soon! Why, it doesn't seem like an hour and a half, does it?"
exclaimed Zan.

"Why, no! I thought we were only half way there!" replied Miss Miller,
as the girls hastily gathered their baggage together.

The party hurried off, and across the platform to a waiting local train
on a side-track. The engine and coaches were old-fashioned, the windows
small and set high from the floor. The girls laughed at the sight of
such cars, and climbed up the high narrow steps to the platform.

Farmers constituted the majority of the passengers and the city girls
were amused at the different types presented before them.

"Girls, let's open these windows immediately! Mercy, how _can_ any one
sit in these stuffy cars with the crevices all stopped to prevent a
breath of fresh air entering!" exclaimed Miss Miller, impatiently.

The girls laughed, for it was one of the teacher's pet theories that
plenty of fresh air never injured anybody.

The farmers looked askance, however, when the pleasant air circulated
through the car and drove forth the obnoxious odours.

Many of the travellers left the train at small way-stations and Miss
Miller's party had the car all to themselves during the last few miles
of the ride. Zan recognised the land-marks that showed her they were
almost through with their journey, and she ordered the girls to get
ready to leave the car.

Bill Sherwood had been notified that the party would arrive at noon,
and had his team and farm-wagon waiting at the station when the
would-be campers jumped down and looked about in high spirits. Zan
introduced each one to Bill, while the latter grinned and held his
palmetto hat circling in his toil-hardened hands.

Straw had been piled in the bottom of the wagon and the girls were
lifted over the great wheel and dropped into the soft straw. Miss
Miller was accorded the distinction of sitting on the high spring seat
beside the driver. She held her breath in trembling and grasped the
edge of the rocking seat whenever Bill turned a corner or gave way to a
passing vehicle on the narrow road.

The drive over the hills was beautiful and Bill pointed out various
spots along the road and explained the value of soil, herbage, and
trees.

After seven or eight miles had been covered, the horses began ascending
a steep hill well-timbered.

"When we get to the top of this climb you will get one of the loveliest
views we have about here," said Zan.

"Yes'm," assented Bill, "and there's where you kin spy th' farm, too."

"Then we must be almost there," ventured Miss Miller, whose seat on the
loose spring board was anything but comfortable.

"No'm, not by four mile more. The gent what ust t' own th' farm afore
th' doctor got it, ust t' say, 'Bill, this air th' longes' four mile
I ever hope t' travel!'" and Bill chuckled to himself as the team
strained at the haul up the steep road.

Long before the travellers reached the farm every one was stiff and
glad enough to jump out of the wagon. But Bill warned them to wait yet
a while longer--he had pictured to himself the grand manner in which he
would sweep between the two stone posts and flourish his whip as the
wagon rolled up to the front porch. To permit the girls to jump out
prematurely, would spoil his pleasure.

Having accomplished his ambition, he stood by the horses and grinned
while the visitors exclaimed at everything they saw.

"What a gem of an old house!" cried Miss Miller.

"And that grand old oak in front--just see how far its branches sweep
over the lawn!" cried Jane.

"Look, girls! Look! The original 'old oaken bucket that hangs in the
well!'" sang Hilda, as she saw Zan at the long sweep that worked the
bucket.

"It surely is lovelier than anything I ever dreamed of," sighed Elena,
her artistic sense, for once, gratified.

Groups of fruit trees, some squat and thick, some tall and slender,
vied with elms, maples, oaks, and beech trees, in giving beauty and
shade to the grounds about the house. Some distance back of the house
stood a group of barns, sheds, and a tool-house. The grassy space
between was laid out in a croquet ground and tennis courts. Directly
back of the out-buildings was a fine kitchen garden and small-fruit
bushes and vines. The narrow strips dividing the vegetable patches were
a mass of blossoming old-fashioned perennials. The fragrance wafted
from stocks, sweet-peas, petunias, pansies and other flowers, attracted
bees and honey-birds of every species common in Jersey.

"Rickon you'se ain't sorry t' git 'ere?" laughed Bill.

"Indeed we're not! Travelling all day is as tiresome as working all
day," admitted Miss Miller, taking her bag from the back of the wagon.

"Wall, I'll be goin' on t' th' little house, but I'll be on hand ef
yuh need me fur anything," said Bill, after he had deposited all the
baggage on the porch of the house.

"We're going to sleep indoors to-night and start our camp in the
morning, so the only thing we might need will be some milk and butter,"
said Miss Miller.

"I put two quarts o' milk an' a pound o' butter, an' a dozen o' eggs,
in th' ice-chest that stan's in th' back porch," explained Bill, still
hesitating.

"Ice! Do you have ice here?" wondered Jane.

"Shure! Th' doctor built a small ice-house th' fust year he hed th'
place an' we cuts enough ice from th' pond to fill it every year. Th'
pond is fine spring water, y' know, an' th' ice is clear as crystal,"
explained Bill.

"That's what Wickeecheokee means, you know,--Crystal Waters. Of course,
it's an Indian name that Daddy found in some old archives kept in the
County Hall at the Junction," said Zan.

"We've taken your word for Crystal Waters but I haven't seen a drop of
it so far except what was drawn from the well," laughed Miss Miller.

"Plenty of it when th' Spring freshets come down Old Baldy," chuckled
Bill, climbing up to the wagon seat.

"Going home, Bill?" asked Zan, as the farmer gathered up the reins.
"Well, thanks, ever so much, for coming for us, and remember me to your
wife. Tell her we'll be over there soon," said Zan.

"Oh, that reminds me, Bill, I brought a little present for you and the
wife--wait a moment until I open my bag!" exclaimed Miss Miller, going
to the porch and taking two packages therefrom.

"Mighty much obliged, ma'am!" said Bill, doffing his wide-brimmed hat,
obsequiously.

As soon as the girls were alone Zan unlocked the front door of
the house and ushered her companions inside a long living-room. A
chimney-piece embraced seven feet of space just opposite the door and
the wide cavern of brick fire-place presented a cheery picture to one
who could imagine its blaze and crackle of hickory logs while sparks,
and tongues of flame, leaped up the chimney on a frosty night!

The girls examined books and pictures while Miss Miller went into
raptures over the old mahogany settee, the tilting table, real Sheraton
bookcase and chairs, and a Boston rocker. She tried each in turn, then
spied a grand-father's clock in the corner, and marvelled at the old
wooden works which were strung with cat-gut.

Zan laughed at the different expressions of surprise on her guests'
faces, and when the teacher drew forth an inlaid sewing-table,
exclaiming at the beauty of the lines, she explained: "Muzzer loves to
ride about the country collecting old furniture. Dad made all manner
of fun at first, but he, too, caught the germ, and now he will go for
miles when he hears of some old family that is scattered and wishes
to sell out. The boys and I have stood on the porch and doubled over
laughing at the spectacle Dad and Muzzer have made, trying to drive
through the gateway while a long carved post of an old mahogany
bedstead stuck fast between the gate-posts!"

"What a shame it is to hide these really precious pieces down here! I
love antique furniture when it is good and genuine, and I could almost
cry to think no one ever sees these!" said the teacher, examining a
Colonial Connecticut spindle chair.

"Oh, but we do! And now, you are enjoying them, too!" laughed Zan.
"Just come out to the dining-room if you want to see some real stuff!"

An old Colonial side-board, a massive round table, six Chippendale
chairs in excellent condition, and a linen-press, gave Miss Miller
still further cause to exclaim. The entire scheme was most harmonious,
for old braided mats lay upon the wide-boarded floors, wall-paper was
of the quaint old-fashioned pattern, and a genuine Franklin heater
stood in the corner in case of cool weather. A few logs thrown into its
vast cavern, soon took the chill from the pleasant dining-room, Zan
explained.

"I am afraid I shall prefer to stay here instead of going to the camp,
Zan," ventured Miss Miller, ruefully.

"Then, you'd best sleep on the lawn to-night, for the bed-rooms present
still further temptations!" laughed Zan.

The four girls had gone out of the side-door to see what adventures
were to be found in the back-gardens, but at this point they ran in all
duly excited, so the subject of antiques was abandoned until later.

"Oh, just think! Nita found a rabbit scuttling away. It disappeared
down a hole!" cried Hilda.

"Come and see! Hurry up, Miss Miller!" added Nita.

Zan followed the girls, explaining the presence of the rabbit. "The
boys started several warrens last summer. One is in the woods, one in
the rear garden, and the other is over by the falls."

"I think I'd like to visit the river and falls, Zan, and judge for
ourselves of the truth of the kodak picture!" said the teacher.

"Maybe some one's hungry--and the walk over to the woods takes some
time," hinted Zan, looking at the others.

"Oh, we had plenty to eat on the train, and we can finish our
sandwiches when we get back," answered Jane, eagerly. So the luggage
was left on the porch where it had been placed by Bill, and a noisy
group started off.

Over springy turf, under shady trees, climbing low walls that divided
pastures from grain-fields, these city-bred girls went shouting from
very exuberance of spirits.

At the farthest side of a buckwheat field stood a beautiful grove of
maples. Zan headed straight for this grove and jumped the stone wall
that enclosed the field.

"Hallo! The ground's full of springs! That means we'll have lots of sap
next Spring!" said she, smacking her lips.

"Sap! What kind of sap?" asked the girls curiously.

"Why, maple sap, you ninnies! Didn't you know this was a sap-bush?"
laughed Zan, looking at her companions to assure herself that they were
in earnest.

"I never heard of a sap-bush! I don't see any bushes!" retorted Nita.

"Ha-ha-ha! It's these maples that give us the sap for maple-sugar.
I bet there's lots of maple-sugar in the house this very minute. We
always come here for a few days when the farmers boil the sap down.
It's one of the sports of having a farm."

"Zan, you're a lucky girl! Not one of us ever had the chance of having
all you have had!" murmured Jane.

"I just guess your folks could have had ten farms if you had wanted
them, but you and your brother always wanted to go to fashionable
places!" retorted Zan, truthfully.

They had reached the snake-fence that separated the maple grove
from the woodland, and Zan immediately started climbing over the
simple-looking barrier. She soon hopped off on the other side and
turned to watch the others surmount the difficulty.

"What a queer-looking fence--why do they have two rows of rails?" asked
Elena, while the others tried to reach the top rail.

"Dear me! how did you get over so easily, Zan?" called Nita, who
constantly rolled back at each step.

"Ha-ha! it's a trick fence!" laughed Zan, doubling over with enjoyment
at the different poses the girls were forced to take while they
struggled with loose poles that _would_ roll over.

Miss Miller stood on the ground and studied the problem for several
moments. Then her face expressed understanding and she tried again.
This time she did not lean her weight on the upper part of her body as
she grasped the loose rails, but balanced on her feet, merely using her
grasp above to steady her in climbing.

In a few seconds she reached the top rail, where there was no other
hold. She had a choice of two ways: lay down on the length of top-rail
and crawl down the other side or jump clear from a height of six feet.
She chose the latter.

"How did you do it?" cried several voices.

Miss Miller laughed and joined Zan, who whispered, "You should have
mounted at the cross-posts. See what a fine hold that gives you when
you reach the top?" and Zan demonstrated her words by climbing back.
The girls watched closely and, as Zan returned slowly for their
benefit, they endeavoured to imitate her.

"Might as well overcome the first obstacle now as later--you'll find
plenty of snake-fences to cross in the country," said Zan.

Nita and Hilda soon found the secret of balancing on the rolling poles,
but Elena and Jane had several tumbles before they could scramble over.

A foot-path led through the woods and soon the girls heard the sound of
falling water.

"That must be the river!" exclaimed Nita, eagerly.

"No, you hear the water of the Falls. I'm taking you to the Bluff
first. We can stand there and see the pool, the stream above the
Falls and the slope that goes down to the Big Bridge. We called the
Falls 'Wickeecheokee Falls' and the stream,--which really is only a
creek--'Wickeecheokee River,'" replied Zan.

In a short time the eager adventurers came to a clearing in the woods
and stood still admiring the scene presented.

Just before them, a rocky ledge projected over the Falls about ten feet
above the lower level of the water. The Falls were only six feet from
top to bottom, where the water formed a lovely pool. On the opposite
bank, the ground rose gradually to about five feet above the water,
and this bank was thickly carpeted with moss and bitter-sweet vines.
The woods began with a close array of trees a few feet back from the
stream, the straight timber presenting a dauntless front to the mites
who stood gazing at them in admiration.

The Bluff, as Zan said the ledge of rock was called, extended from the
Falls back forty feet to the pathway, finally burying itself under moss
and thick grass, just where the girls stood. Above the Falls the ground
rose gradually at first, then abruptly, with great boulders of rock
jutting forth here and there. The swift-running stream cleft through
the steep sides, thus forming a miniature canyon, and, where the rocks
hung over the water, masses of lichen, arbutus, and creepers suspended
in a tangled riot. The skyline was entirely hidden by the thick growth
of forest trees.

The sweep downward from the Falls to the bridge had been cleared of
undergrowth so that the view presented--fields of buttercups and
daisies in the foreground and Bill Sherwood's farm-land and cottage by
the road that ran over the Big Bridge--was a most decided contrast to
the wild beauty of the woods and cliffs.

"Well!" sighed some of the girls, "No wonder Zan wanted to camp here!"

"Isn't it beautiful! It is more like an artist's ideal than actuality!"
added Miss Miller.

"Daddy purchased the place from a well-known American artist,"
explained Zan, enjoying the appreciation of her friends.

"I don't see how he could bear to part with it--I would want to live
here always!" added Miss Miller.

"I say that we choose the Bluff for our camp-site!" cried Nita, going
over to the Falls.

"It certainly would be a splendid spot!" added some of the others.

"Well, we'll decide that later--I see Zan wants us to continue," said
Miss Miller, as their guide crossed the stream by means of great flat
stones.

"The boys and I made this stone crossing--and maybe we didn't have
lame backs for a week after we carried these boulders!" said Zan,
reminiscently.

For a full hour more, the city girls climbed steep hillsides or
stumbled down wild ravines, stubbing toes on hidden rocks and catching
unprotected hair in swinging branches, until all began to feel the
fatigue of unused muscles and the effect of hard shoes on mother earth.
When Miss Miller suggested supper, every one turned face homeward
without a regret.

"We will have our ready-made supper that I brought with me in a box,
and Zan can find the milk that Bill Sherwood left in the ice-chest,"
said Miss Miller, as they entered the cool living-room again.

"And I'll go down cellar and fetch some preserves--mother said we could
use all we wanted," added Zan.

"O-oh! goody! just think of it--home-made preserves!" said Nita.

"We'll set the table, Zan, if you show us where to find the dishes, and
show us the ice-chest. Nita can go down to help you with the preserves,
if you like," said Miss Miller, unpacking a large pasteboard box filled
with sandwiches, cake and fruit.

Before supper was quite ready the twilight had fallen, making it
necessary to have a light.

"My gracious! I never gave a thought as to light! I am so accustomed
to pushing the button and having light, that I quite forgot we had no
electricity out here," laughed Miss Miller.

"Oh, pshaw! I forgot, too! I just hate to clean lamps and fill them
with kerosene--your hands smell so dreadfully forever afterward!"
grumbled Zan.

The other girls laughed but then they had never cleaned lampwicks nor
had coal-oil soaked into the pores of their hands!

Zan pouted but made no move to find the lamps. Miss Miller felt sorry,
for she knew how unpleasant the task could be, so she began to say,
"Zan, I'll----" when she suddenly stopped.

She quickly left the room and went out on the porch to admire the soft
tones of approaching grey in the night-sky.

"What's the matter?" exclaimed Zan, running after the teacher.

"Why, nothing, dear! I thought I would wait here until you had the
lamps ready," returned Miss Miller, keeping a serious face with
difficulty.

"Oh, dear!" sighed Zan, reminded of the distasteful work.

As the four other girls had absolutely no knowledge of lamps and their
accessories, they could not be expected to offer to attend to them. Zan
turned to the teacher and ventured, "I think we can use candles for
to-night!"

Miss Miller looked at her charge out of the tail of her eye and bit her
lips to keep from laughing.

"I'll go and hunt up some candles. Mother keeps them on the stone ledge
of the cellar," sighed Zan, getting up from the step where she had
momentarily sat down.

"Of course, I have no jurisdiction over you yet, as we have not
formally organised a Lodge, but I know this much!" said Miss Miller,
with decision in her voice; "I would not permit one of my Band to
shirk a _duty_ if it presented itself, no matter how disagreeable
it appeared to be. Cleaning or filling kerosene lamps is not just
_cleaning and filling lamps for material use_. Don't you know that,
Zan?"

Zan looked up at her teacher in blank astonishment and her lips parted
as if to speak, but she was silent for a moment.

Miss Miller watched her and waited.

"Why, what under the sun would we use lamps for if it were not for
light?" exclaimed Zan, finally.

"Oh, as to the use of lamps--that is another thing. Yes, even an
inanimate lamp fulfils its purpose well, doesn't it?"

Zan stared off into the darkness and pondered this.

"I se-ee!" whispered Zan, after a silent pause of some moments. "Miss
Miller, I thank you!" and she ran indoors singing.

"Thank goodness, I didn't spoil that opportunity by offering to look
after the lamps!" breathed Miss Miller, gratefully, to the Principle of
right living.

Zan not only worked out her dislike for kerosene that very night, but
she cleaned so many of the small glass lamps that the supper table
was a twinkling circle of lights. As the girls sat about thoroughly
enjoying the first meal in the country, Zan proved to be the gayest of
the party. Several times she met the smile in Miss Miller's eyes and
felt well rewarded for learning her first lesson in Woodcraft--even if
it was the overcoming of distaste of a given duty!

The four other girls were appointed dish-washers but Jane demurred.
"It's so dark and we're tired--why can't the dishes wait for morning
light!"

"The morning has work of its own--any one who would eat must earn! You
may leave the dishes till morning if you choose but then there will be
no breakfast for that one who shirks!" said Miss Miller, a suggestion
of authority in her tones.

"But we're out for fun! We don't want to _have_ to do things unless we
feel like it," argued Jane.

"I suppose you will say, 'the horrid old thing! She's just as mean as
she used to be at school,' if I insist and teach you why a task must be
done at the time given," ventured Miss Miller.

Jane flushed uncomfortably for she had entertained a faint suggestion
of just such a thought about the teacher. But she looked bravely back
at the smiling eyes and declared, "No indeed! I wouldn't be so rude as
to say such a thing!"

"Did you girls ever stop to consider the power of our thoughts?" asked
Miss Miller, beginning to pile the dishes up on a tray.

The girls, sitting comfortably about the table, looked questioningly at
her.

Miss Miller had reached the side of the table where Jane's dishes
waited. She took up the plate but leaned upon the high back of Jane's
chair and continued to speak in a conversational voice.

"Here's something for all of you to experiment on now! See if any one
of you can speak, act, or move a certain part of the anatomy, or even
breathe, without first thinking the thing!"

Miss Miller stood waiting while the girls sat and gave their attention
to the suggestion. After a few minutes of silence, Nita exclaimed, "How
queer! I never thought of that before!"

"But, Miss Miller, we do not have to _think_ to breathe! My lungs do
_that_!" cried Zan, her education along medical lines showing in her
words.

"Well, much of our physical action is all unconscious on account of
generations of habit. But let one part of the organism fail to act, and
see what ensues! Now, I have tried to learn how to allow my thoughts
to take the helm of steering my human ship, and not let the different
parts of my body control _me_. You see the ME of myself is not in
bones, blood, or muscles. Neither is it to be found in my heart, brain,
or any local part of this human temple. The ME is my right and ability
given by God to express MYSELF. The only way I have found to do this
best is by _thinking right_!"

Miss Miller paused to look around at the faces and see what impression
her words had made. Each girl expressed interest; Nita incredulity, Zan
amazement, Hilda keen delight, Elena vaguely reaching out for more,
Jane intelligent understanding.

"What has all this to do with washing dishes?" asked Nita.

"I am leading up to that; I wish this Band to start at the very
beginning to do things right. To do this, we must not do anything
thoughtlessly, so the action of our thought on everything about us
ought to be thoroughly understood. Anxious thought always produces
undesirable effects, just as good, optimistic ones produce harmony
and happy results. If one spends anxious thought on the body, or any
particular function of the physical organism, that part feels the
effect of the quality of thought and responds accordingly."

"But, Miss Miller, you just said we ought to think of our breathing and
walking and acting--now you say our thoughts will interfere with those
actions!" wondered Elena.

"Perhaps you did not quite get the meaning of my words, dear. I meant
to convey to you that no action of the body could take place without
YOU--the thinking part of you. When a dead body cannot move, or speak,
or breathe, it is not due to anything lacking in bones, flesh, or
muscles--they are just the same as in life. It is because the thought
that operates and controls the temple is gone. Because functions of
the body operate mechanically in response to your thought, I say,
_let_ them work freely and without interference just as long as they
work harmoniously. But do not give any cause for action to be impeded.
Never permit fear to enter your thought, as that instantly clogs the
machinery of the body. Never waste valuable thought in wondering how to
beautify your face, massaging for wrinkles, or leanness or flesh. That
only makes matters worse, for instantly your thought carries its effect
to the parts you worry over. Let good health and simple living bring
about the desired results, and they will be lasting. But girls, I did
not intend to give you all this preaching the first night, only I had
to correct Jane's tendency to think wrong about dish-washing."

"Now, Miss Miller, how evasive!" laughed Jane, thinking the teacher was
joking. "Dish-washing had nothing to do with your theory on thinking."

"Surely you can't expect me to continue the harangue!" returned Miss
Miller, starting for the kitchen with a pile of dishes.

"I want to have you apply the lesson to my particular failure to think
right about dish-washing!" laughed Jane, eagerly.

"Yes, yes! We all want to hear just how you can do it!" added the other
girls.

"Why, just this, dears. We have had our food to nourish the body that
must act at the suggestion of thought, and for this blessing we are
grateful; for a weak, or impoverished body does not respond to the
command of thought, no matter how willing it may be to act. After
filling the receptacle for food one should not give way to lethargy--a
common fault and inclination. Lethargy forms fat and soft muscles!
Express your thanks to your thought and the benefit food gives the
body, by obeying whatever dictates thought gives you for the perfect
circulation of conditions. The dish-washing is a natural sequence of
events following supper. So, I interpret it that thought has this
work for us to do which will be sufficient exercise for us after a
light supper. The very sense of having _done_ with apparent duties for
the night, will give your thought a comfortable relaxation while you
sleep. The nagging idea that some work has been slighted or postponed,
even though you may not be conscious of its effect upon you, will,
nevertheless, cause a mental shrinkage and this in turn will draw your
facial muscles into knots, and also cause unpleasant dreams. One who
seeks repose with the sense of having completed all of the day's work
with as conscientious application as is possible to him, will always
find perfect rest in a sleep that renews one's physical being."

"That's enough for one night!" cried Jane, laughingly, placing her
hands over her ears and running out to the kitchen.

Miss Miller and the girls laughed as they followed. In less than a
minute's time, Jane had a tin pan down on the table and was pouring
hot water from a steaming kettle, over the soiled dishes which she had
piled in the pan.

Every one was too tired and sleepy to sit on the porch and watch the
moon rise over the hill, or listen to the hum of insects, so, provided
with a small lamp, each one stumbled up the steep narrow stairway to
the floor above.

Even Miss Miller's enjoyment at seeing old mahogany failed to rouse
interest in the carved four-posted beds, or high-boys, and the
patch-work quilts seemed merely a light covering for weary bodies,
while the gaily colored mats before the beds acted for aching feet,
the same purpose any ordinary mat might do.

There were four rooms on the second floor. Two large ones with double
beds which were allotted to four of the girls. Zan took her own little
room that had a window opening toward the moon, and Miss Miller took
the other small room with a single bed in it. Just before the girls
dozed off, Miss Miller warned them again that the rising hour was five
in the morning.

With this last conscious advice all were soon asleep, some to roam
in dreams over the hills and valleys, and some to float in mahogany
furniture on the breast of the stream, enjoying the flowers and trees
as they were swept past.




CHAPTER THREE

DISCOVERY OF THE "THINKERATOR"


The bright sunshine peered straight into Miss Miller's face in the
morning and invited her to listen to the singing of birds, the busy
clucking of chickens, and the swish of the pines that stood near her
window, at the back of the house.

She leaped from bed and sighed with happiness at the picture of rural
beauty before her. But how could the noise of thrifty chickens reach
her when Sherwood's cottage was so far away?

"I must investigate!" murmured Miss Miller, as she quickly dressed and
crept downstairs. Out of the back door took another minute and she
stood on the kitchen stoop looking eagerly about. From the direction of
the carriage-sheds came the sound.

"I must call and say good-morning," said the teacher, and forthwith ran
along the path until the out-houses were reached.

There, sure enough, was a scolding hen with a dozen chicks misbehaving
with all their might, and a few other sedate hens, intent upon
breakfast.

"Bill must have brought them over yesterday. I'm glad for the girls'
sake, as it will be part of their education--becoming acquainted with
all manner of creatures."

Miss Miller cheeped, too, and attracted one of the small yellow balls
of down and soon had it cuddled up to her face. The mother-hen, albeit
she had been scolding a moment previous, now flew into hysterics at the
threatened kidnapping of her chick.

"Poor little mother! Did you think I would rob you of a child?" laughed
Miss Miller, as she carefully placed the little chick in the grass.
Then, taking a deep breath of fresh morning air, she walked back to the
house.

"I suppose the children _are_ tired after yesterday! I must guard
myself and not be too critical and severe with them--they are still
young and only partially developed, both mind and body!"

She reached the kitchen and started preparations for breakfast. While
the cereal was boiling and the kettle singing, she gathered a bouquet
of flowers from a roundel on the front lawn. These gave fragrance to
the table, and by the time the dishes were all placed, the cereal was
cooked.

"High time they were up!" quoth Miss Miller, as she went upstairs to
rouse the girls.

But Zan, a true country girl, had been awake for some time and enjoyed
the fresh morning breeze from her window.

"Did you make friends with Groutch?" asked she, as Miss Miller smiled a
good-morning to her.

"Groutch--who's Groutch?" pondered the teacher.

"Why, the old hen! She's always quarrelling with friends or family, so
we named her Groutch," laughed Zan.

"Oh--the hen! I wondered how she got there? Did you see me talking to
her?" replied Miss Miller.

Zan laughed delightedly at an opportunity to correct the teacher.
"No--I _saw_ you there but _heard_ you talking!"

"One for you, Zan! That casts discredit on my early morning thinking
apparatus, doesn't it?" said Miss Miller, laughing at her own expense.
"But tell me--did Bill bring the chickens?"

"Thereby hangs a tale," giggled Zan, turning her back and asking Nita
to hook the centre of her dress-waist.

The other girls came in to hear a possible story, and Zan explained the
presence of Groutch and her friends.

"Last summer Fiji had the chicken-raising fever and we let him have the
carriage-house for his venture. He succeeded, too, but Fall came and
we had to go back to the city. He had sold half his chickens to mother
during the late summer, and wanted to sell the other half to friends
in the city, but Daddy didn't like the idea of that. Finally, the
butcher in Junction took all he had, and when it came time to deliver
the chickens on our way home, not a sign of Groutch and the three other
hens could we find! We had to leave with only the spring chickens. A
day after we got home Bill Sherwood wrote Fiji that the hens all came
back to roost outside the house the same night. Fiji wrote for him to
take them to the butcher the first time he went to Junction. And, Miss
Miller, you can believe me or not, those hens skiddooed every time Bill
Sherwood planned to catch them! After several vain trials, he sent word
to Fiji that he was done with chicken chasing! How we laughed at that
letter!"

"How remarkable! And I never gave chickens credit for any
intelligence!" said Miss Miller.

"No, and most folks think they are stupid things; why, you know the
slang saying, 'crazy as a hen,'" added Nita.

"Well, they're not! Why, that Groutch wouldn't even go to live in
Bill's chicken coop with his flock. No siree! She just sulked about
here until Bill had to open the carriage house for her to make her nest
again. Then, he cut a small opening near the door so she could get in
and out when the door was locked. In the next day or two, Bill missed
the other hens from his chicken-house where they had been contented.
And what do you think! That sly old hen had gone after them and led
them back to their original home--and there they've stayed ever since!
Whenever we come down to visit the farm those daffy old hens cluck
and wriggle about Fiji's feet as if he were the Prince and they his
subjects!"

"I think that is lovely! To think of those hens showing their joy and
recognition that way!" exclaimed Miss Miller, amazed.

"Daddy says that Fiji has the true Nature instinct, for every animal
he meets seems to know him instantly and show a regard for him," added
Zan.

"I have always wished that I had that great gift! It can be cultivated
with great sincerity and love for Nature, but some are gifted with it
unconsciously!" sighed Miss Miller.

The four girls had listened to Zan's tale with wonderment, and as Miss
Miller remembered the breakfast, and said it was waiting, Jane said,
"We should have missed this in the Adirondacks."

"I see many beauties we would have missed had we gone far off to the
mountains! One of them is the lowly and silent lesson under Elena's
feet," said Miss Miller.

All eyes looked down at the floor but saw nothing beside the braided
mat. Miss Miller smiled and ran down-stairs without vouchsafing an
explanation.

"Miss Miller certainly does puzzle me until she deigns to explain--then
it all seems plain as day!" said Hilda.

But further talk was interrupted by a delighted cry from the front
porch. The five girls hurried down and joined their teacher on the
porch.

"Why--strawberries! How did they get here?" cried some of the girls.

"A note on top of one box said that Mrs. Sherwood sent them over for
our breakfast--if we had not finished already!" laughed Miss Miller,
looking at her watch.

"It must be almost eight o'clock!" ventured Nita.

"No, it is five to six!" replied Miss Miller.

"Six--why it feels like noon!" said Jane.

"That's because the air is so invigorating," returned Zan. "We always
have to get up early in the country, and that gives you such a long,
long day to enjoy!"

"I suppose Sherwoods rise at four," Miss Miller said.

"Dear no! Why four o'clock is almost midnight! Why should any one wish
to get up at that dreadful hour!" cried Nita, horror-struck at such
habits.

"Because country folks retire with the sun and rise with it--that's
what all true Indians do, and so will we presently," said Miss Miller,
smiling at the various expressions on the faces about her.

"Come now, we'll hull the berries and then enjoy them!" and in a few
minutes every one was engaged in crushing the ripe fruit in a deep dish
of rich cream--real unadulterated cream!

When the dishes had been washed and placed in the closet Miss Miller
advised each one to unpack what baggage had been brought by hand the
day before. The clothes worn on the journey down to the farm were to
be carefully hung in the closets upstairs and the ordinary gymnasium
uniforms worn until their costumes were completed.

"Our next step will be to choose a permanent site for our tents, and
try to move the articles we need from the barn to the woods," said Miss
Miller.

"Can't we ask Bill Sherwood to do that? It's so warm to-day," cried
Nita, peevishly.

"If Bill were not here, who would you have do it?" asked the teacher.

"Hire some one else, I s'pose," muttered Nita.

"I wonder what you would have done if we had gone to the wild mountains
for our first experiment, as you wanted us to," asked Zan, curiously.

"Oh, that would have been different. We'd _have_ to do our share there,
you know, or go without," replied Nita.

"That is exactly what we intend doing here--work or go without!" said
Miss Miller, emphatically.

"But that tramp across the fields and woods to move the bedding and
other stuff! Phew, Miss Miller, do you realise what a herculean task
that means?" replied Nita, dismayed.

"It gets worse every minute we stand here and worry over it!" laughed
Zan.

Without further ado, Zan, followed by Miss Miller and all of the girls
excepting Nita, went toward the barns where the boys' tents and outfits
were stored. They were soon thrown out of the wide hay-loft window and
due inspection given them to test their worth for usage.

"Girls, has either one of you thought of a possible way to carry these
outfits over to the Bluff without exerting yourselves too much?" asked
Miss Miller, when the girls stood ready to shoulder their burdens.

They looked at each other for an answer. None came. Finally,
Jane looked at the teacher and laughingly remarked, "One of your
_think-right_ schemes?"

Miss Miller nodded and smiled. "How did you know?"

Jane was dumb, as she had merely thought of teasing Miss Miller and was
taken aback at her reply.

"Is it possible that Zan hasn't an inkling of what to do in this
case--and she is a country girl?" added Miss Miller.

No one seemed inspired with original thought that morning, so the
teacher started for the woods, carrying her burden.

"Wait a minute, Miss Miller!" shouted Hilda. "Give us time to figure
this out, and save our backs!"

Every one laughed, still no one could solve the way to move without
doing the moving. Again the teacher sighed and said, "When one won't
think, one must pay the price!"

This time each girl shouldered as much of the outfit as could be
comfortably carried, and followed in the footsteps of the teacher, who
was at least twenty feet in advance.

At the Bluff, the heavy luggage was dropped with sighs of relief. Miss
Miller left the girls to either think or go back for the rest of the
canvas and cots.

"I am going down to Bill's for the stuff that came out by express a
few days ago. The cases are down in the Sherwood's barn. Bill offered
to open them and help me take the stuff out. While you girls see that
the other things are moved over here I will attend to moving up the new
things." With this the teacher started down the slope.

"Hey! Miss Miller, won't you tell us the secret in moving without
moving?" laughed Zan, catching hold of the teacher's short skirt as she
passed.

"I find that a child that depends upon the mother to help it out of
difficulties never advances like the one who has to work his own
problems. I believe that one reason our city newsboys are so clever is
just because they must depend upon their own wits. It puts a sharp edge
on wits--using them for oneself."

As soon as the teacher had disappeared about the corner of Sherwood's
cottage, Zan suggested a plot to trap her. The other girls laughed
merrily and jumped up to follow Zan into the woods.

The boxes and bales at Bill's barn were soon unpacked and Bill stood up
wiping his brow with a red bandanna. He took a calculating glance at
the steep slope and remarked, "Some haul!"

"Oh, not for a strong plough-horse that has been idle for two days!"
replied Miss Miller, innocently.

Bill flushed and his eyes shot fire as he said, "Meanin' jus' what,
ma'am?"

"Why, you told me how Nancy ate her head off since the family were not
coming down and no extra work could be found for the horse to do. I
thought she could drag these things up to the Bluff for us," replied
Miss Miller, finding it hard to control a strong inclination to laugh.

The farmer's face underwent a sudden change as he smiled broadly and
replied, "Oh, ya'as-sam! Of course! Nancy is a powerful beast!"

The two went to the barn to request Nancy to come forth and take her
part in the day's work, when Miss Miller spied a queer steel-barred
frame lying on a rubbish heap by the side of the barn-yard fence. It
looked like a skeleton of a huge cradle without rockers.

"Bill, what is that strange thing over there?"

"That? Oh, that's a section of an old harvestin' machine we hain't used
fur years! They've got better ones nowadays. That one is on'y good t'
sell fur junk!" explained Bill.

"Then we can have it now, can't we? Have you a piece of strong rope?"

"Sure! but I don't see what yuh want with this ole cradle," mused Bill.

"You'll see!" said Miss Miller, as she tied one end of the rope
securely to the steel cradle and hitched the rope to Nancy's harness.
The cradle was dragged across the grass to the pile of articles
awaiting transportation. The cradle was soon filled and Nancy started
up the slope. At the Bluff the goods were deposited and Bill sent back
with Nancy for the rest.

Miss Miller stood sorting out the various things when a loud laugh
sounded from the trunks of some nearby trees.

"Ah-ha! We caught you shirking work!" called the girls as they ran out
and surrounded the teacher.

"Oh, no you haven't! You merely saw the effect of some common sense
thought!" retorted Miss Miller.

"Hum! So that is what you meant when you wanted us to think of an
ordinary way to move?" laughed Zan.

Miss Miller nodded while the others stood about with nothing to say.

When Bill came up with the second load he smiled at Zan as he remarked,
"Miss Miller is some conniver, eh? But I rickon she ain't strong on th'
house-work idees. Ef she was, she'd be a powerful help to my ole lady
who gits laid up regerlar ever winter with stiff jints, so thet mos'
th' house-work comes on me."

"Bill, maybe I can show you both some things this summer that will not
only make living a joy but keep stiff joints out of your experience
entirely," replied the teacher.

"Say, ef you kin do that! The doctor tried en failed wid his medicine,
an' him's a smart doctor, too!"

Zan laughed appreciatively at the comparison and turned to Miss Miller.
"Now, you have to show Bill or lose your reputation as a 'conniver.'"

"There goes Nancy--down the slope toward her feed-bag! If you girls
want to take advantage of my patent moving-machine, you'd better run
after and catch her!" laughed Miss Miller.

This put an end to health discussions at the time, and the girls raced
after the horse before she could get too far away from them. It was a
simple matter to haul the outfit from the barn to the Bluff, and Zan
plumed herself upon the idea that made them hide behind the trees to
watch the teacher and discover her plan to move the baggage to the
Bluff.

All assembled about the heap of baggage on the Bluff, Miss Miller
suggested that each one select a spot for her tent and start erecting
it.

"Why, the Bluff here is the very spot!" said Nita.

"Couldn't be better!" added Elena.

"It has a lovely view, hasn't it?" said Hilda.

"I don't see how it is practical!" objected Miss Miller.

"Why, do you know of a lovelier place?" asked Jane.

"Oh, no. The _beauty_ goes without saying."

Zan pondered the accent on the word "beauty" and the way the teacher
spoke of practical. She waited for further developments.

"Well, then, girls, let's shove these bundles off of the Bluff and
drive our stakes!" ordered Nita, taking for granted that every one
would do as she said.

"If you have no objections, I think I will pitch _my_ tent over by the
edge of the forest trees," ventured Miss Miller.

"Of course you can camp where you like, but I don't see why you'd go
way back there when this wonderful view can be had as we lay in bed and
watch the sun rise!" remonstrated Nita.

"Guess we won't spend much time in bed watching the sun rise, and the
view is just as fine out of the tent as in it," replied Miss Miller, as
she picked up her canvas and ropes and started for the grassy ground
near the trees.

The girls began with mallets and pegs, but the stakes would not
go down. The moss was only an inch thick and scarcely any soil lay
underneath in which to hold the pegs. Here and there a crevice in the
rock would permit a stake to enter a bit and snap it off short. The
girls grew hot and angry at the futile work but Miss Miller seemed to
be very successful in pitching her tent.

The girls stood and watched for some time, as she drove some stakes
in the earth quite easily, then fastened some ropes from one tree to
another to give extra security in case of a blow.

A few smaller twigs and saplings had been cleared out of her way,
leaving a delightful shady spot where the tent stood. Zan swallowed her
pride and went over to look at the completed work.

"The view isn't so very much when you come to think of the fact that we
won't be in our tents very much!" ventured Zan.

"I don't expect to use mine except for sleeping, and one can't see the
view in the dark," returned the Guide.

"Miss Miller, did you know we'd have hard work trying to drive pegs in
the Bluff when you stood there waiting for us to _think_?" asked Zan,
smilingly.

"Yes, dear, and I would have liked to save you the work, but that isn't
helping you. Charity never helps, it hinders."

Zan ran back to tell her companions, but found them all in a
quarrelling mood because they had been so unsuccessful in accomplishing
their own intentions. Nita was saying disagreeable things to the
others, and Jane had just told Nita what a little cat she was. Hilda
had rolled over in the freshly pulled moss, her face buried in its
cooling green. Elena sat pouting on the edge of the Bluff swinging a
mallet back and forward, threatening to strike Nita's angry face every
time it swung back.

"Girls, we're a lot of idiots! Miss Miller is the only one with sense.
Go over and look at that tent, then come back with sugary smiles and
drag these tents over next to hers. I have just learned to parse the
word beauty as she pronounced it when she said, the _beauty_ of the
Bluff went without any contradiction. In parsing, I find that beauty
is not always the desirable object! It's well enough in its way, but
for driving stakes to hold down canvas tents, give me a good old solid
chunk of ground!" said Zan, decidedly.

"Well, anyway, I'm not going to hide myself way back as far as she is.
We can find plenty of ground nearer the Bluff and not feel cooped up by
the trees," ventured Nita, as the other girls followed Zan's example
and carried their paraphernalia over to the trees.

Thus it happened that Nita's tent stood first from the Bluff, a few
feet to the side of the trees. Hilda and Elena chose a site a few feet
back from Nita's and near enough to a tree to utilise its trunk for the
ropes. The third smaller tent was quite close to Miss Miller's but not
as far back as hers.

"The stakes do not go down as deep as I think they should, girls, but
you can change them this afternoon if you decide to move back where my
tent is. As they stand now, a strong wind may tear them down."

"Oh, they'll hold all right! What's the next thing to do?" said Jane,
who was tired of bothering with tents.

Miss Miller looked at her watch. "It's only ten o'clock and you girls
have been up since five. Maybe you'd like to walk to the house for a
piece-meal?"

"Would we? Well, I just guess there'll be no dissenting voice on that
proposition!" laughed Hilda.

"I must confess, my appetite says it must be nearly supper time," added
Jane.

Without further ado, the Clan started for the house to pacify a gnawing
that interfered with work or play. On the steps of the front porch, a
veritable feast was soon enjoyed. Although it consisted of bread and
jam sandwiches, with water as a stimulant, never did the five girls
taste anything so delicious. When all the delectable bread and crumbs
disappeared, sighs came from five hearts.

"Dear, why is it that good things never last half long enough!"
wondered Zan, aloud.

While the others laughed, Miss Miller arose from the floor where she
had been sitting, and walked out to the grass at the side of the house.

"What do you see, Miss Miller?" called Elena.

"I thought we might have a little visit in the garden. We will like
some edibles at camp to-night, and the garden is so near, we may as
well see what we can find."

The girls eagerly assented to the plan and were soon on the path
leading to the garden, pails and baskets swinging as they went. They
were passing a patch of early potatoes when the Guide called their
attention to the humble vegetable.

"Doesn't any one here eat potatoes?"

"Of course we do, but we can get them on our way back," replied Hilda.

"How many of you know whether a potato is a root, fruit, or stem?"
asked Miss Miller, as she stood near a healthy plant.

"Wh-y, it's a fruit, isn't it?" replied Jane.

"No, it's a root," added Zan.

"'Tis neither," said Miss Miller. "A potato is a swollen stem that
sends up shoots above ground to bear leaves. I will show you," and the
teacher dug up a small potato.

"As the potato grows these small eyes form deeper folds. It looks for
all the world like an eye with a heavy lid over it. If we want to use
this potato the next year for planting, it is left in the cellar until
time to cut. In early spring these eyes send out tubers, and every
tuber will make a new vine when planted. Sometimes one large potato
will make several good vines.

"The old potato furnishes starch for the new growth to feed upon and
before the young potatoes form under ground the old one is dried up by
the use of its starch. The green leaves send down nourishment in turn
for the young potatoes at the end of the stem, until they have attained
their growth in the Fall.

"Potatoes used to be grown from seed that formed in the small pod
left when the blossoms fell off. But growing potatoes from tubers of
old ones was so much quicker, and saved so much labour, that a crisis
has been reached in the present day. The potatoes are now unable to
produce seed! No seed is to be had for general use. Last year an offer
of several hundred dollars was made for a thimble-full of potato seed,
and do you know, girls, that not a farmer in the United States could
procure enough potato seed to win that prize offer!"

"Why, my goodness! What will we do?" said Zan.

"We'll have to retrace our steps and find a way to accomplish progress
without so important a loss. No one has ever given a thought what to
do in case of a potato famine, for the homely vegetable has always
been so abundant. But its very value is depreciating slowly, for very
few potatoes will keep long, and almost all potatoes have great black
spots in the centre, while many of them have 'dry rot.' This is due
to the manner in which they are grown to-day. Each crop depletes the
nourishing qualities of the new one, and finally they will no longer
flourish."

"Add to this the pest of potato bugs and it looks as if potatoes were
doomed, doesn't it?" added Zan.

"Bugs? Why, Zan, do potatoes have bugs?" cried the girls.

"The vines do! Potato bugs look a great deal like a lady-bug only I
think they are prettier," replied Zan.

"But they are not as harmless as the lady-bug," added Miss Miller. "A
potato bug will soon destroy a vine if it is left to feed unmolested."

"What can one do to them?" asked Jane, curiously.

"Dad pays the boys and me a cent a dozen to carry a small tin can under
each vine and, with a stick, push them off of the potato vine into the
can with some kerosene in it," said Zan.

"Ugh! How can you! I think that is horrid!" exclaimed Elena, her
artistic soul in arms against such a method.

"This summer Bill will have to spray hellebore on the vines, or use
Paris Green to kill the bugs, for I don't want to spend time that way
any more," said Zan, laughing at Elena's expression.

Miss Miller smiled, too, as they continued through the garden and came
to the grape arbour. She gave them a short talk on the habits and
qualities of various grapes and how to distinguish the grape-vine-leaf
of the different varieties.

"Miss Miller, I spy a few cherries left for us by the robins. I will
climb the tree and pick them while you tell the girls about the fruit,"
offered Zan, taking her basket and soon, up among the branches,
throwing down cherries for the Band.

"If we had been a few weeks sooner we should have seen the blossoms
fall off and leave small cups where they have been. This cup dries up
and finally bursts. Inside it, the tiny green cherry has been forming.
This now grows and with the aid of sun and rain, becomes this size,
but it is still green; when it is full-grown it turns a pale yellow,
then pink, and lastly a crimson like this one. At that time, the fruit
is ripe for picking, or the robins will get them before you know it!
Robins are very fond of ripe cherries."

Zan had gathered all within reach and slid down the tree with her
basket. "Hardly worth the bother--there are so few," said she, shaking
them in the bottom of the basket.

"But they are fine and sweet!" remarked Jane, smacking her lips over
one.

"Oh, look quick! See the rabbit over there in that green patch!" cried
Elena, eagerly.

"Yes, it's one of the bunnies I told you of. He knows where the carrot
and cabbage patches are. He's digging for a carrot now. Let's go over
very softly and watch him," said Zan.

But the rabbit was too timid to remain at dinner with a number of noisy
girls watching nearby, and he soon disappeared.

Hilda pulled out the young carrot the bunny had partly dug out and
asked Miss Miller about it.

"The carrot is a root vegetable that is at first a tiny thin string
that grows down into the dark earth. As the leaves grow the root grows
too, and in the fall when the leaves dry and die, the root remains
until it is dug out for use. If it is not used it remains in the ground
until spring when it sends up new leaves and flowers. The blossoms
make seeds and these in turn fall and grow new carrots, then the old
one, its purpose fulfilled, dies."

"Poor old carrot! It works away down in the darkness all its life, and
furnishes flowers for new carrots, and then dies, without ever having
enjoyed the world," sighed Zan.

"But it did its work well, and that is all we are expected to do here,"
said Miss Miller.

"Well, I think I'd like a bit more beauty in my life than the carrot
gets, or I'd rebel," laughed Elena.

As the Band walked through the garden, first noting one vegetable, then
another, they arrived at some fruit trees. "There's a prune, girls,"
said Miss Miller, pointing to a plum that hung in the sunshine from a
slender tree-branch.

"A prune! Why, it's a plum!" laughed Nita.

"A plum that will be a fine prune some day!"

"Are prunes made from plums?" asked Elena, dubiously.

"Yes, but not all plums will make good prunes. A special kind is raised
for that purpose. In California, where most of our best prunes come
from, great orchards of plum trees grow and bear fruit. When the plums
are ripe they are gathered and packed in boxes to be shipped to every
part of the globe."

Zan spied some raspberry bushes after that and ran over to see if
any were ripe enough to pluck. She gathered enough for supper, and
turning back to join the other girls, found Miss Miller pointing out
the difference between red and black raspberries. The girls listened
eagerly to the interesting information that showed them how the
blossoms fell to make way for the green seed. The seeds later, swollen
to the size of a ripe berry, being green, gradually changed to a pale
yellow; the sun and dew still reaching it turned it to a pink, and
at last to the rich crimson with the down on the face. If it should
happen to remain on the stem, it would finally dry up and scatter its
tiny seeds to sink into the ground and start another vine growing the
following spring.

The Band gathered enough lettuce and fruit for supper, and vegetables
for dinner the following day, before Miss Miller started toward the
house.

After leaving the garden, the teacher explained that she thought they
ought to hold a meeting that afternoon at the Bluff. Being only five in
number, they could not have a charter granted by Headquarters until the
customary number were members--ten or more.

"We will try and win our rights by doing the required tests as quickly
as possible, then, when we can take the Fire Brownie's tests without
mistakes, we can call for a second Band to unite under our Tribal
banner. The two can grow side by side until the number--ten--belong
to each Band. After we have two Bands and at least ten members all
told, we will be ready to be initiated as a Tribe by the Council at
Headquarters."




CHAPTER FOUR

TRIBULATIONS OF THE CAMPERS


The girls followed the trail, leading to the Bluff, picking up dry
twigs, bark, and grass on the way. Elena, with customary desire for
artistic effects, had stopped at the house in passing and taken a
Navajo blanket from the settle. This she proposed using for a covering
on the rock where Miss Miller would sit during the first Council.

She ran gaily after the others, calling to them to wait. As they
stopped so many times for handsful of fire-material, Elena soon caught
up with them. The blanket was heavy, so Miss Miller said she would be
exempt that day from duty of gathering fire-wood. Just before they
reached the Bluff, however, Elena spied a hollow old tree. Instantly
divining what might be found therein, she threw down the blanket and
ran over to investigate. Sure enough! From the hiding-place Elena drew
forth an old squirrel's nest.

"Oh, ho! just see what I found, Miss Miller!" cried the delighted girl.

The others crowded about and envied the joy of being the first one in
the Band to find such a trophy.

"Girls, wouldn't it be fun to begin at once and try for an honour in
campercraft? When we finish our organising let us experiment with
fire-making until we succeed according to the book."

The girls eagerly agreed to the teacher's suggestion and were soon
seated in a circle about the upthrust of rock where the teacher sat as
was her right. The Navajo colours made a bright dash in contrast to the
sombre grey of rock and green of forest.

"If there are any preliminary questions to ask, girls, let us attend
to them, as we will want to conduct our first meeting in an orderly
manner," Miss Miller waited, but no one had anything to ask, so she
continued.

"Of course, you all know that I took the degree of Camp Doctor, as
I passed more than twenty of the tests. Being trained as a physical
culture teacher, I naturally understood most of the tests given. Dr.
Baker and Mrs. Alvord stood as sponsors on the application and Hilda
represented the third witness necessary. She intends taking part of the
tests soon, and qualifying for the degree. As Camp Doctor I feel that I
have a right to act as director of this camp until one of you qualifies
in degrees, or otherwise, to take rank as Guide or Chief. How long that
may be in the future only Time will show. Now, your parents all agreed
to choose me as Guide, and I have their signed agreement so to do. This
should go in our Tally Book as part of our first procedure in meeting."

Miss Miller took a paper from the bag that bulged with papers and
books, and showed it to the girls. They recognised the signatures as
being those of their parents, so Miss Miller proceeded with the next
item in order.

"We must have a Tally Book for the general use of the Band, and each
girl ought to have one of her own. I saw one that belonged to a member
of the Council and it was a work of beauty. As Elena is artistic by
natural talent, I suggest that she take charge of our Band's Tally
Book. Each one ought to take such a pride in her individual book that
it shall merit an honour at Headquarters when it is displayed--but this
is a matter for personal ambition. The Keeper of the Tally Book fills
the place of secretary in other organisations, so I would advise Elena
to make a memo of the minutes of this meeting. I have a book made up
for general use, but a piece of paper will do now, to make notes upon.
From that you can copy the minutes correctly and decorate the real book
as elaborately as you like."

The girls approved the choice of Tally Keeper and Elena was delighted
at the opportunity to display her talent freely. Miss Miller referred
to the Manual to assure herself that she was acting according to order.
She gasped and looked up suddenly.

"My! I started off this meeting without the usual ceremony of opening
council with the Omaha Tribal Prayer. I was told that this was an
important function, so, girls, let us sing it now."

Miss Miller arose, motioning the five girls to stand also; then started
singing the words and music of the prayer while the girls tried to
follow as they watched her. This done, she seated herself again, and
turned to Elena.

"Make a note that each girl must learn the words of the song by heart
before our next meeting. I have the printed music in my tent."

Elena scribbled a memorandum and the Guide placed a large book, made of
brown paper pages, covered with natural tanned leather, on her knees,
saying, "We'll enter the names of our members now, and then we can call
the roll properly."

This was the next step accomplished, so that all felt they were
proceeding in a business-like manner when the Guide gasped a second
time.

"Dear, dear! Girls, we should have started a fire the _very first
thing!_ Elena, _please_ do not enter all these errors in our Tally
Book--it is unpardonable! But this is all a new idea for me and we must
all seek together for the result. We will patiently retrace our steps
now, and begin with the council fire. Do any of you understand how to
use rubbing-sticks?"

Each girl looked at the other but no one knew the use of the sticks, so
Miss Miller sought in the bulky bag until she pulled forth a bow and
sticks, then she sought again until the section of wood and a hemlock
knot was brought out. The girls gazed curiously at her as she began.

"You must each start a set of fire-sticks of your own, using models
given in a book I have in my trunk. Now, let me start the first
council-fire and you watch carefully so each can do it when the turn
comes."

Miss Miller prepared the dry wood material all had gathered on the walk
to the Bluff, but chose Elena's dry squirrel nest as tinder. She placed
the eight-sided (almost round) drill so that the thong of the bow went
about it _once_, to prevent slipping. Then the point of the drill was
placed in a notch of the fire-board and the board accurately placed
over the fire-pan. This in position, the Guide began sawing back and
forth with the bow just as if she was scraping strenuously on a violin.
After some minutes of this, a faint suggestion of smoke came from the
block; then it was easily seen that the wood was charring and the smoke
grew heavier. Several more firm strokes brought a lively curl of smoke
from the board and fire-pan, and Miss Miller stopped to blow softly on
the small heap of dark dust that was piled up in the tiny wooden notch.
This suddenly emitted a spark, then died down as suddenly. Still the
Guide blew softly and swayed back and forth to keep a gentle current of
air stirring on the powder. Then, she quickly took a handful of the dry
nest and placed it over the powder just as a second red spark gleamed
from the small heap. The smoke grew thicker, and before the girls could
exclaim with surprise, a bright flame shot up before their eyes.

"There now, let us build our first council fire in the centre of our
circle," said Miss Miller, as pleased with the result of her efforts as
any one could be.

The fire was carefully fed with dry moss, leaves and twigs, until
the blaze warranted some wood to be piled on to sustain it. The new
members stood around admiring the feat, and all wanted to try the
rubbing-sticks to see if they could make a fire.

"No, indeed! Each must make her own set to use and never borrow mine!"
laughed the Guide, placing the set behind her as she sat on the council
seat again.

Hilda was elected fire-keeper for the occasion and the others all sat
down on the grass again.

"This time, girls, I believe we have followed first rules, so that we
can go on with our other business affairs," said Miss Miller.

Zan had been looking over the Manual and suggested, "We haven't chosen
a Wampum Keeper yet! I know a good one!"

Miss Miller smiled. "I guess she is the one I had in mind."

"Girls, have you any choice--a Wampum Keeper acts as treasurer you
know, as well as sees that our beads and other details for ceremonial
councils are in order," explained Zan.

The girls looked at each other for a moment only, then Elena said,
"Hilda is the best house-keeper of us all, and she is exact in keeping
accounts, too, so I think she ought to be Wampum Keeper."

"I think so too!" added Jane.

"Just what I thought," agreed Zan, looking at Miss Miller. The latter
nodded smilingly, but Nita said nothing.

"Hilda is chosen by all but you--have you any other one in mind?" asked
Zan, turning to Nita.

"Oh, no, I s'pose one's as good as another, but I don't see why Hilda
should be given charge of the money belonging to our Band. She never
handles much and is not accustomed to it," retorted Nita, showing
jealousy in every tone.

"Ha, ha!" laughed Jane, angrily. "I guess Hilda has charge of more
_real_ money than you ever saw! She runs the house for her mother, you
must remember, and _she_ pays _cash_ for everything and enters it in
her book, too!"

Zan felt like adding something disagreeable but remembered her
promise to her father, so Jane's answer delighted her. Nita flushed
unpleasantly as most of her friends knew that her household was
conducted on "charge accounts" and merchants had great difficulty in
collecting bills. She hastily agreed to Hilda as treasurer after Jane's
remark, and the Guide continued.

"Now, as Zan has had more real experience in rural life than any of
you, I suggest her for Big Chief of this Band."

This was unanimously voted upon and it became Zan's privilege to select
a Little Chief to act in her absence. Zan, without hesitation, chose
Nita.

There was a second's pause as if the choice was a surprise. Zan glanced
toward Miss Miller and found her eyes beaming, for both recognised the
silent vow of the other to do all they could to wean Nita from her
past temptations and open before her desires, a wider and higher plane
upon which to grow.

Nita was so delighted at being elected Little Chief that she forthwith
began "preening her plumes." The other girls seemed not to like the
choice but Miss Miller hastily changed the subject by introducing one
of great interest.

"Girls, I have so many things to say that it is hard work to keep to
one subject, but I will try. Now, we ought to try for all the honours
and _coups_ we have opportunity to win. I know of no spot where so many
advantages combine to offer us these opportunities as this section of
New Jersey. Flowers, birds, trees, insects, trails, reeds,--in fact
everything, we find at hand to study. We are given the farm to use
during our ten weeks' vacation, and sleeping in tents all summer means
we win a _coup_ for fulfilling the sixty nights sleep out of doors!
Then, there are _coups_ and grand _coups_ staring us right in the eyes,
for the simple act of taking hold of them! Just think of it! We can win
_coups_ for dancing, for weaving, for star gazing, cooking, building,
rug making, and lots of other things. I shouldn't wonder, what with the
talent of each one used to teach all the others, that we might aspire
to becoming an honour Tribe before the year is out!"

"Oh, Miss Miller! You should have had a _coup_ this very day for making
that fire, shouldn't you?" asked Zan.

"No, I'm afraid I can't claim that, as Elena found the nest, and the
others gathered the fire material; but I am glad I know how to do it,
as the next attempt will be easy. For every claim for an honour or
_coup_ you must be sure to have three witnesses so that our claims will
go to Headquarters properly made out and signed. I should hate to have
them send us back our papers for lack of attention on our part," said
the Guide.

Zan had been glancing through the lists of _coups_ and honours, and now
exclaimed, "Why, I can win a _coup_ for swimming and one for walking,
as easily as rolling over on this grass."

"Yes, all these things count when done rightly, and I am most
enthusiastic over the promising future for us," said Miss Miller.

"Well, let's get going on something to win our first _coup_," cried
Jane impatiently.

"If all are agreed, I will read the Law from the Girl's Manual aloud,
and then adjourn the meeting with the Zuñi Sunset Song," ventured the
Guide.

"Ho, Miss Miller! Wait a moment! Jane wants to get busy too soon! I see
a very important thing here in the Manual that we ought to hear before
adjourning," cried Zan, holding the book open for the Guide to read
from.

"This is very important, girls, so I will read it," admitted Miss
Miller, as she glanced over the page. "For our first summer we will
be styled 'Wayseekers' (Tiopa) and we must qualify as such. Also,
we must begin to perfect ourselves in fifteen of the twenty-three
qualifications needed to promote us to 'Pathfinders,' (Mikana) as shown
here."

The Guide then proceeded to read the different articles set forth
in the Manual, and some time was given to the discussion over each
item. The girls began to realise that there was much more in being a
Woodcrafter than mere fun-making, and the deep meaning of the work
began to be understood.

"From present appearances, it looks as if it would take us a life-time
to accomplish all of those tests," said Jane impatiently.

"It's only one at a time, dear! If you were country-bred and were
accustomed to wild life, you would exclaim at the simplicity of the
work," said Miss Miller kindly.

"I guess that's so! It is merely our ignorance of ways of rural life.
Just as soon as we really get down to business we will be astonished at
our progress. I remember how it was with our classes in school. From
the books it seemed too hard to master, but whenever we took a trip to
the woods to study botany, and other things, it just became so easy!"
added Elena.

"All right, let's go to it now!" cried Zan.

"Zan, if I was a member of the National Council I would surely exile
any one who used slang as much as Hilda and you do!" remonstrated Miss
Miller.

"I just bet more than half the girls would be exiled then!" retorted
Zan.

"I find on page 20 of the Manual that one must abstain from a besetting
sin for one moon! I reckon that covers the difficulty with you
girls--slang is your besetting sin, so you will surely have to abstain
if you are to qualify."

As Miss Miller said this, the girls laughed at her clever manner in
reaching the delinquents through the Manual.

"Well, Tribal friends, I'm growing stiff in the 'jints' as Mrs.
Sherwood would say, from sitting in one position so long! Is there
anything more to do?" said impatient Zan.

"Why, of course! we haven't been baptised yet!" laughed the Guide.

"Oh, that's settled long ago, as most children's names are. We will be
called Wickeecheokee Band," replied Zan.

"Such a mouthful! Do you really yearn for that name, Zan?" asked Jane
plaintively.

"Not if there's a better one!" returned Zan.

"We might use a short name for our Band and later when we are a Tribe
use Wickeecheokee for the Tribal name," suggested Hilda.

This was declared a good idea so silence reigned for a long time
while all sorts of names were considered. After many suggestions and
much debate the name of Wahko Nia, meaning springs of water, was cut
to Wahko for everyday use. The long Indian name could be used for
impressive occasions if needed. So the name of Wahko Band was entered
in the Tally Book.

With a song the meeting adjourned, the girls jumping up stretched
themselves with sighs of relief. The next words from the Guide changed
their contentment to consternation.

"Girls, some of our food is still at the house!"

"Mercy! Why didn't we bring it over when Nancy was working?" asked Jane.

"I simply won't trail back there to-day!" whined Nita.

"If some of us are willing, it seems that all of us should help, or go
without supper," said Miss Miller gently.

The other girls started off without another word, and the Guide waited
a few moments to see if Nita would join her. Instead, Nita wandered
toward her tent saying, "I am going to lie down and rest!"

Miss Miller felt discouraged at the failure, so soon, in the attempt to
help Nita, but she trudged after the others without further coaxing of
the stubborn member. At the house, the food was soon packed in baskets,
and every article that might be found necessary was tucked in at the
sides. Just as they were ready to return, Nita was seen sitting on the
edge of the porch with a huge basket of things she had voluntarily
gathered in the garden without a word from the others.

Of course it was entirely unnecessary for that day, but the Guide felt
that it was Nita's peculiar way of showing how sorry she was for her
recent behaviour, so the basket of vegetables and fruit was accepted
with delight.

On the trail back to camp the fruit was devoured by the hungry girls,
then Zan began nibbling at some crackers she found in her basket.
The others wanted to sample the crackers too, so Miss Miller had to
interfere.

"If you eat sweets now you won't want to have any supper when it is
ready."

"Oh, won't we though! It is very evident, Miss Miller that you never
camped with hungry growing girls before!" laughed Hilda.

As the Bluff was sighted the girls felt eager to end their journey, so
put on an extra spurt of speed.

The baskets were placed upon a high flat rock to be out of the way of
insects, and Miss Miller looked at her watch.

"If you are not tired, girls, there is just time for a swim before
starting on a hike--or would you prefer a walk first and then the swim?"

"Oh, goody!" cried Zan, running toward her tent.

"But, Miss Miller, we haven't any suits yet! They have not come from
the city!" said Elena disappointedly.

"It wouldn't injure the fabric in your union suits to wear them--not
this once! And each one of you brought a heavy suit with you in case of
need!" ventured the Guide.

Nita and Jane laughed hysterically at the idea, but the other girls
clapped their hands and agreed that the suggestion was great! Without
further objection, the two former girls also started to find their
union suits in the baggage that was packed in their trunks inside the
tents.

While they were dressing Miss Miller called out, "How many of you can
swim the required hundred yards and win a _coup_?"

"I can--or at least I could last summer," replied Zan.

"I can swim some, I don't know how far!" said Jane.

"I can swim a stroke!" exclaimed Hilda, and the other two girls
admitted the same lack.

"Dear me, girls! don't tell me that you three can't swim at all!" cried
Miss Miller, amazed.

"What opportunity has a city girl to swim?" asked Hilda wonderingly.

"Why, child! In winter there are a number of good Municipal Bathing
houses open for girls, and everything is kept in splendid order too.
Then, in summer there are plenty of summer resorts near the city where
one can bathe and learn to swim!"

"But a girl can't visit them alone, and parents haven't much time to
escort one to such resorts--so there you are!" replied Hilda.

"Yes, that's true! Well, with fine camps started, girls, as well as
boys, will be able to enjoy the woods as well as the waters of the
country, without cost of time or money for parents," said Miss Miller,
as she came from her tent dressed in a neat one-piece bathing suit.

The others were waiting for her, looking self-conscious in their union
suits. The Guide saw this and decided that they must be made to forget
themselves at once. So she proposed a race from the tents to the willow
tree that stood by the pool. The winner to have an extra cookie for
supper.

The scramble that followed proved just the thing to distract their
thoughts from their appearances, and by the time all reached the tree,
they were laughing, and gasping for breath.

The pool, in summer-time, was nowhere more than four to five feet in
depth. Possibly, just under the Falls the water might measure six feet,
but no one ever went there. From the Falls the water spread out in a
circle-like basin until its centre measured about thirty feet across.
It gradually narrowed again toward the willow where the stream formed
the outlet of the pool. The entire floor of the pool was of rock,
worn smooth by the water. This smooth surface and the Falls creating
an ever-flowing current, kept the pool clean and the water as clear
as glass. It was partly due to the bed-rock that made the water so
transparent, that the Indian name for Crystal Waters was given the
place.

Miss Miller urged the girls to jump in but Nita dipped her toe in at
the edge and screamed, "Boo! but it's cold!"

"That's not the way--do this!" laughed Zan, plunging in and immediately
submerging her whole body.

"My, what a wet mess your hair will be!" called Hilda.

"The sun'll soon dry it again. Don't bother about your hair! Half the
fun in swimming is ducking your head!" sputtered Zan.

Miss Miller plunged in next and took a few strong strokes that carried
her halfway across the pool.

The girls on the bank watched her admiringly.

"My! Miss Miller, you sure can go it!" cried Elena.

The Guide's example encouraged the three girls who hesitated on the
verge of the pool. Jane had been swinging on a pliable branch of the
willow, enjoying herself immensely. Zan now called to her to come in
with them and show how far she could swim. Jane in her eagerness to
race with Zan, let go the willow before her footing was quite firm
on the bank, with the result that she stumbled and fell against the
three girls huddled on the wet grass. Before any one knew how it all
happened, Jane, and the three girls, went pell-mell into the water,
creating a mighty shower of water everywhere.

"O-ooh! Help! Murder! S-swish--sc-cswash!" and other queer sounds
came from the struggling group of girls. Miss Miller had just gained
the opposite bank and had seated herself on the grass when the funny
accident took place. Zan had been treading water and had missed the
slide, but jumped up at the shouts.

"Oh, what a funny motion picture that would have made!" gasped the
Guide as soon as she could speak.

Jane was swimming over to join Zan, and the three soaking
non-combatants, tried to force their fists into their eyes vainly
hoping to expel the water. Ears were singing, and noses snuffling and
they looked like anything but joyous pleasure-seeking maidens.

After a few minutes, however, the fear of drowning faded with the sense
of feeling their feet on the rock which was only a depth of a foot or
so, where they had scrambled up. The wild laughter of Zan, Jane and the
Guide did much to reassure them that life still held on with a firm
grip for them.

"As long as you're all soaked, why not come in gracefully?" called Zan,
taking a dive and swimming under water to the spot where Jane rose to
rest. In a few seconds Jane gave a frenzied scream and went head down,
heels up, in the water.

"Oh, look! Jane's sinking!" cried Elena.

But Zan's head appeared alongside Jane's heels, and in another moment,
the victim of Zan's mischief bobbed up.

As her head appeared again, Miss Miller called, amid spasms of
laughter, "Right position! Front! Mark time!"

Zan was the only one who thoroughly enjoyed the command so often obeyed
at school, while Jane snuffed angrily, "Just wait!" The three deluged
girls were too busy trying to lower their bodies gradually, and still
keep their feet flat on the rock.

"Oh, here! Nita, hold on to my hand while you let yourself down flat on
your stomach! Then try and kick out as Zan does," advised Hilda.

Nita obeyed and held clutchingly on Hilda's hand. Just as she felt
herself touching rock-bottom and experienced the delightful sensation
of being buoyed up by the water, Elena, who had been experimenting
alone, splashing out arms and legs, suddenly came in contact with the
timid beginner and shoved her under water. Nita excitedly caught hold
of Hilda's foot and a second unexpected dive took place, with Hilda,
the heavy, on top of Elena, the light.

More cries and shouts from the tobogganed beginners, and yells and
laughs from their audience. Then, the Guide started across to show the
three girls how to begin.

After fifteen minutes more of practice, Miss Miller said, "Time to come
out, girls. We've been in over half an hour, and that is quite enough
for the first dip."

"Dear me, at this snail's pace, we will be Wayseekers all summer!"
grumbled Hilda.

"Oh, no you won't! In a week's time you'll be swimming a few strokes
and in another week probably you can do fifty yards. Your power of
endurance will determine how soon you can swim the hundred yards," said
Miss Miller, as they reached the camp, and went in to dress.

"Not one of us remembered to count our hundred yards, although I'm sure
I did fully five hundred all told," said Zan.

"Counting that under-water trick--yes, maybe you did!" replied Jane,
giving Zan a look that boded no peace for the future.

"How does every one feel! Weary--or right for a short tramp up the
ravine?" came from the Guide who dressed first and was waiting on the
Bluff for the girls.

"Weary--I should say not!" cried Hilda enthusiastically.

"I'm as fresh as a daisy! Could climb a dozen ravines," added Elena.

"I'm not tired, but why do any more now?" sighed Nita.

"Because we want to drive that lazy spirit out of you!" retorted Zan,
dragging the girl up to her feet.

"I thought we might take a hatchet and whittling knife with us on the
hike and put them to use for our third test," suggested Miss Miller.

"We'll have to get a hatchet, or small axe at the house," answered Zan,
with a frown at the idea of walking to the house again.

"No, I placed one of the hatchets in my tent after we had finished
driving the stakes. Bill took his home I see, and Zan carried the one
from the house back to the tool-house, for I watched her and mentally
gave her an honour mark for placing things where she found them,"
commended Miss Miller, as she went to her tent and brought out a small
hatchet and displayed the knife called for by the rule.

[Illustration: THE INTERESTING STUDY OF INSECT LIFE.

  _The Woodcraft Girls at Camp._       _Page 114._
]

"Aren't they dear! Where did you get them, Miss Miller?" questioned
Zan, as the girls crowded around the Guide and admired the new tools.

"I wrote to Headquarters and found out where I could purchase
outfittings," replied the Guide, leading the way toward the hill. All
of the girls wore khaki bloomers and soft shirts, with heavy stockings
and rubber-soled sneakers protecting legs and feet, so that the
hill-climb presented only a Nature test to be thoroughly enjoyed by
them after their invigorating bath.




CHAPTER FIVE

SOME AMAZING THINGS IN NATURE


"Girls, as long as we are off for a hike, why not make something worth
while of the time?" asked the Guide looking at her companions.

"Anything you say goes with us, Miss Miller!" said Zan emphatically.

"Well, then suppose we try to identify our native trees--as many as we
find in this section of the country--and begin to gather wild flowers
and plants, for Jane to make blue prints from. At the same time we can
study their botanical features and arrange them in groups for use in
trays, or pictures."

"Why, that is a novel idea! How did you think of it, Miss Miller?"
cried Elena, her artistic nature roused.

"I love wild flowers, and I always did think they would make beautiful
decorations if properly treated so they would retain their lines and
details," replied the Guide.

"It's too bad you didn't mention it sooner, so I could have brought a
basket or something to keep them in," said Jane.

"Why carry a basket when one can be had for the picking!" laughed Miss
Miller.

Again the girls were mystified, and waited for an explanation. It
was slow in coming for the Guide seemed very intent upon seeking for
something she could not find.

After ten minutes' walk she exclaimed, "Ha! I thought so! The kind of
grass I wanted always grows near the hill-tops."

She motioned the girls to sit down while she gathered a few handsful
of long wiry grass and showed them how to weave a fine grass basket.
It was a small model but very compact and strong. They watched eagerly
while deft fingers flew and the grass strands went in and out, until
the roll on top was finished. The handle was another matter, and Miss
Miller said she would make that another time.

"But this is so dainty it will never hold plants or roots!" said Elena.

"Not this sample but we can make others on the same lines and use other
materials. Perhaps Zan can show us where we can find some rushes, or
wand-grass. Then too, willow makes good strong baskets."

"Why, sure! Right down by the Bid Ridge we can gather all the rushes we
want, and a whole group of young willows grow over by Pine Nob--that's
a giant hill back of Hamilton's Farm," exclaimed Zan eagerly.

"Some rainy day, then, we will sit by the fire and make some rush
mats," added the Guide.

"Oh, stop! please don't mention any more, or my head will whirl
off!" laughed Jane, holding down the top of her head, but with eyes
sparkling with anticipation of all the _coups_ waiting to be won.

Miss Miller smiled as she started on up the hill-side. "Don't wait for
me to point out a tree--take the first one you see. The same with the
flowers and shrubs."

"But here's some grass that ought to make a strong basket!" called
Nita, who was a few paces ahead.

"Yes, let us gather some and construct a carrier in case we find some
plants we want to dig up, root and flower," advised the Guide.

They were all eagerly engaged in their first attempt at weaving with
grass and found it not nearly as easy as it seemed when the Guide was
doing it. Sometimes the grass slipped, sometimes it broke; then, it
would refuse to slide up or down, and again it would cut into tender
flesh if it was pulled too hard.

After a time, however, a sort of a misshapen bowl-like article was
finished by Hilda who declared it looked just like an Eskimo's
treasure. The other girls decided to carry their material and
half-finished shapes with them and wait for another recess in the hike
before weaving more.

"I see a maple!" exclaimed Elena, as they climbed.

"Pshaw! every one knows a maple tree so there can't be anything new
worth hearing about a maple," said Nita.

"How do you know but that we may discover some new feature about a
maple that you never dreamed of before?" asked Miss Miller.

"Hitherto unpublished--exclusive rights claimed by Wickeecheokee Band!"
added Zan.

"Not so many moons since, I met a group of girls who were greatly
surprised to find that sugar came from maples!" added Miss Miller,
smiling at Nita.

"Oh, that was different! What I mean now, is, that every one knows a
maple when they see one, and it's nothing new."

Miss Miller examined the maple thoughtfully for a moment, then said,
"How many of you know what kind of a maple this is?"

"We have one like it on the front lawn and Dad always calls it "the red
maple,"" replied Zan.

"Yes, it is a red maple. _Acer_ is the Latin name, while maple is the
common name. Now look at the height of this tree and tell me how tall
it will grow before it reaches its full growth?"

"This one is not twenty feet, is it?" asked Elena.

"No, about twenty--I should say."

"The red maple on our lawn is at least thirty feet high, Miss Miller,
and Dad says it is an old tree," said Zan.

"About thirty feet is the average height. Now, tell me, do you think
this tree will thrive best on this hill-side or down in the glade
beyond the bridge--where the ground is low and moist?" continued the
Guide.

"I don't know--do you?" said Jane, looking at the other girls.

"Give up! There's another item we failed to know," replied Zan.

"The red maple thrives best in low woodsie land. It needs rich soil
and plenty of moisture. Now examine the bark of this one carefully. It
is smooth and spotted, but this is an old tree in spite of its height,
for the spots grow dark on old trees and are always lighter on younger
ones--in fact, quite young trees have white spots. Its timber is
valuable for house trim and some kinds of cabinet work. The red maple
is highly ornamental and of late years has been selected for landscape
gardening and shade trees."

Miss Miller looked at the tree a moment, then said, "We will review
this lesson on the house-lawn where Zan says a large maple grows. Now,
pass on to the next tree."

"I see a great big oak!" cried Elena.

"How many kinds of oak do you suppose there are in the world?" asked
Miss Miller.

No one could tell her so she replied, "I do not know myself, as I
suppose there are many species never heard of in the great forests
of South America, Africa and Asia. However, we know there are the
White Oak, found mostly in the United States, Adriatic Oak, European
Oak, Live Oak of the Southern States, the Holm Red Oak, commonest
in Northern States--this is a Red Oak tree--, Black Oak, one of the
loftiest of forest trees, and a Live Oak of Asia. The timber of each
one of the Oak species is valuable, as its grain is straight, the wood
hard, and of strong quality and durability. I remember the oak ceiling
timber of my old home.[A] The house was built long before Washington
crossed the Delaware and my father inherited it along with a few
acres of ground. When I was a little girl of about six, mother wanted
the old dining-room modernized. The carpenters contracting to do the
work showed us some solid timbers that were hewn out by hand with the
axe. On the side where mother wished two windows to be turned into a
bow-window for her winter flowers, the men had to saw through a beam as
hard as iron. Finally, the boss carpenter said, "We will have to take
this beam out whole to save time and strength." They did so, and what
do you suppose we found cut in one side of that oak beam?"

The girls had been listening with all attention, but of course no one
could imagine what was found.

"The dates of the time when Washington's army were in winter quarters
on Fort Nonsense, Morristown, N. J. Several of his men were stationed
at the old house and had cut their initials in the beam which must have
been exposed at the time. Father found out that the window-casing and
ceiling of plaster were added later to beautify the house according
to up-to-date ideas at the time. At the time the army camped on the
mountainside, the house was of rough timber, without any attempt at
finish or adornment."

"How interesting!" said some of the girls.

"What became of the log?" asked practical Zan.

"The George Washington Headquarters requested the loan of the beam to
exhibit in their museum."

"Then that oak beam lasted over a hundred and forty years and was good
as new when found!" declared Zan wonderingly.

"Yes, it would have lasted a hundred and fifty more, if it had been
left encased safely as it was when found," replied Miss Miller.

"Was it a Red Oak?" asked Nita.

"How could Miss Miller tell, you ninny! She was only six years old!"
said Jane.

"I don't think any one thought to investigate at the time. The people
were not so keen for Nature lore then as now," laughed Miss Miller.

Then continuing, "This oak has leaves, you will see, with deep
veinings; they are scalloped on the edges, and curved out toward the
middle-sides and in again toward the end. This tree, I should say, is
about eighty feet high, although they grow to a hundred. Their diameter
is from one to three feet through. The leaves of this oak were green
when they first grew but they turn red as the season advances and by
fall they are a beautiful crimson."

As they passed on, Jane cried, "Here's a chestnut tree, as every one
knows!"

"Do you know anything of its individuality?" asked Miss Miller.

"I know that it blossoms into long feathery catkins that smell very
sweet, something like the blossoms on our grapevines," said Zan.

"And I guess every one knows that the fruit is found in a burr that
pricks your fingers like fury if you're not careful," added Elena.

"I know that the wood is good for fence-posts 'cause Dad ordered Bill
to be sure and get chestnut posts for the fence that closes in the
out-houses," Zan remembered.

"Anybody else wish to contribute?" asked Miss Miller.

"Every one wants to but can't afford it this time," laughed Jane
eagerly.

"Well then, the chestnut is a deciduous tree that grows to a
considerable height and size. Its timber is light weight, cross-grained
and very durable; that is why it has been preferred in the past for
posts. Its leaves are long and shiny and has sharp pointed edges. The
nuts are sweet and of a starchy nature, also highly nutritious. The
variety we have had in such numbers in the Middle Atlantic States have
been destroyed by a strange fungoid disease that attacked them and was
spread rapidly by wind and the birds until the finest trees are gone!
It is almost impossible to detect the diseased tree until it is fated
and soon an entire grove is doomed beyond help or cure.

"Foresters and gardeners have sought to protect and save other trees by
cutting down a tree the moment the symptoms appeared, but it has been
found useless. Even the timber of a diseased tree is worthless as it is
soon entirely eaten by worms that are bred in the tree during the first
stages of the disease."

"Maybe that is why we don't see so many chestnuts for sale?" pondered
Hilda, who was very fond of the nut.

"Perhaps, and perhaps it is because a sick tree does not bear well.
Personally, I believe chestnut trees like quiet and retirement and
droop to die when civilisation creeps too close to their environment.
If that is so, the chestnut trees have seen their best days, and the
future will continue without any acquaintance with the extinct tree,"
said Miss Miller.

"Miss Miller talks of trees just as if they knew what was going on
about them!" laughed Nita.

"That's what always makes her talks so vital and interesting to us!"
commended Zan.

"They are all alive, and _do_ know all that concerns them, but mortals
never stop to think of this! I look at it in this light. We read in
Genesis that God made _everything_ and He saw that it was very good.
Then, the narrative goes on to say that the Creator who made everything
that was made had all Life, all Intelligence, all Love within Himself.
Of this great power and love He created man in His own image and
likeness. Man was given dominion over all _living_ creatures and
things. Now take that into your thought, girls! All living things! I
firmly believe that the good God who gave us charge of all _living_
things wanted us to watch over and love and use intelligence in the
way we governed His creation. This tree is a _living thing_--it has as
much of the divine authority to live as we have. It has as much divine
intelligence as anything created for a purpose. So, this tree is
recognised by me, who am also created by the same Father for a purpose,
as a living thing growing to beautify the universe and to provide man
with delicious food."

"Oh, Miss Miller if you were only a man what a fine preacher you would
make!" exclaimed Zan enthusiastically.

"I can preach as well in my sphere as a woman!" laughed Miss Miller.

"Oh! are you a suffragist!" gasped Nita.

"Would it change your opinion of my qualities and character, if I
admitted I was? I did not _say_ I was, I only ask you if it would make
a difference to you with what I _really_ am?"

"Well, I don't know anything about the matter except what my mother
said to her friends at a card party one day. She didn't understand how
women could lecture and parade and ask for the vote when they could
have a good time at home playing bridge and going out shopping, or
taking a week-end trip to some friend's country house."

Miss Miller never said a word in reply neither did she tell Nita
whether she was a suffragist, or just a pleasure-seeking woman.

"Dear me, what was it we were talking about when we got switched off
the track!" said Elena.

"Chestnuts!" laughed Zan, the others joining her.

"I see a hickory tree--I'll choose that if you're through with other
subjects," said Nita.

"All right, and we will give you first choice to tell us all about
the tree," replied Miss Miller, as they forced a way through the
undergrowth until the tree was reached.

"I don't know a thing about it except that I like the nuts."

"How did you know it was a hickory tree if you were not familiar with
the bark or leaves," asked Miss Miller.

"I heard Zan say so and point it out to Jane as being a splendid tree
for nuts in the fall," replied Nita.

"I can describe the nuts and the shell, and that's about all. I always
know a hickory when I see one, by its leaves and the way it grows, but
I can't tell why it is so," said Zan.

No one could tell so Miss Miller explained. "The hickory is found in
plenty in North America. It has pinnate leaves, grows from seventy
to ninety feet high and is slender in trunk. The timber is heavy,
tenacious, and strong, but it decays rapidly when exposed to heat or
moisture. The bark is rough and easily stripped. The blossoms are short
catkins, sweetly perfumed, and the nuts are highly nutritious, forming
inside of a cover of shell-bark that peels off in quarter-plates."

"I think I can describe one after that, and pick out a hickory from
other trees," remarked Hilda.

"So c'n I--who couldn't?" retorted Jane.

"How many trees does that make?" asked Miss Miller.

"Maple, oak, chestnut and hickory," Zan counted off on her fingers.

"Four! We've got to find six more," cried Elena, pushing on to seek a
new variety of tree.

"Here's one that you'll be glad to hear about," called Zan. They turned
back and saw a low bush-like tree that would have been passed by
without a look, if it hadn't been for the alert Zan.

"That's a bush!" sneered Nita.

"It's called a tree in botany!" retorted Zan triumphantly.

"Yes, a hazel-nut is a tree although it looks like a bush to me,"
explained Miss Miller.

"Is that a hazel-nut tree?" wondered Jane amazed.

"It doesn't look like much!" said Nita deprecatingly.

"Looks don't count for everything--wait till you want some hazel-nuts.
This is a record-breaker for nuts!" snapped Zan, defending her pet
hazel-nut.

"I consider a hazel-nut a very interesting specimen to study. Its
blossoms are very small and very sweet; in fact, a cluster of hazel
flowers makes a lovely nose-gay. The male tree blooms in catkins and
is more conspicuous. Its growth is like unto a large shrub or low
tree with wood that is tough but flexible. The leaf is shaped like a
roseleaf and notched on the edges. The nuts form in a bell-like cup and
the meat is very sweet and good.

"The Witch-hazel, from which a fluid called 'Pond's Extract' comes, is
peculiar in that it blooms in the Fall--the yellow stars shining in
the woods. The name originally was spelled 'wyche' meaning a box. The
wood was always used for making chests that fitted in old-time halls.
These chests or wyches, had no connection whatever with magic. To-day,
however, the common belief is that the name is derived from the magic
power of the 'Dowser' or Water-Finder. A hazel wand is accorded the
quality of discovering water under the ground when held in the hands of
certain people. If the holder passed over a spot where water could be
found the wand would bend until its tip touched the earth where water
could be found if dug for."

"Do you believe that, Miss Miller?" asked a sceptical one.

"I used to accept the statement as a fact until quite recently when
I read of a renowned engineer who claims that the wand is quite
unnecessary as water can be found by any one strong-minded enough to
concentrate upon the discovery about to be made. This Englishman,
who is an authority in such matters, says that many well-known
engineers have tried and found that the wand has not the inherent
power to discriminate or fathom for water. I have known folks who
might experiment and carry a wand forever without its ever moving a
hair's breadth in their hands, as they themselves were too material
and 'thick' to discern the things under the earth or above the earth,
either!"

"Let's sit down here and listen to more of this queer talk," suggested
Zan eagerly.

"No, we are out for a tramp to find trees and I am not going to talk
of things you are not old enough to understand," said Miss Miller
positively.

"Miss Miller, here's a maple, but it's not red!" said Jane, pointing to
the rounded top of a thick tree.

"That's a sap maple like the ones in the sugar grove. If it were spring
we could tap the trunk and get some of the sweet saccharine that
rises up in the trunk. The sugar maple grows as high as seventy feet
and sometimes measures three feet in diameter. It has hard wood, of
satiny lustre. It generally has a well-formed crown and thick foliage.
A single maple will yield from five to ten pounds of maple sugar in
season."

"Zan, for goodness' sake, let us have some sugar when you can get it!"
exclaimed Elena.

"All right, remind me and we will ask Bill if there is any left from
this spring's boiling," replied Zan.

"There's a Christmas tree, Miss Miller."

"Oh, help! A spider's got on me! It crawled from that bush!" cried
Nita, vainly squirming and shaking herself to throw off the insect.

The other girls ran away from her for they too, were afraid of a spider.

"Pooh! It won't hurt you! Can't any of you tell the difference between
a poisonous and a harmless bug?" Zan cried.

"That gives me an idea," said Miss Miller, as Zan brushed off the
gaudily striped spider. "The first afternoon we have to spare from
routine plans, we will take up the interesting study of insect life,
and learn not to call everything a bug!"

"If we do half the things we hope to accomplish, we'll be the prize
Tribe of the Indians!" commented Zan.

"We must always strive for the unattainable. Although we are not aware
at the time that our goal is far beyond our capacity to attain, still
it is the incentive that makes for progress. Having once obtained
what we desired, we are disappointed in the realisation and so keep
on striving. Discouragement and laziness, are the two worst enemies
that progress ever meet. I think that of the two discouragement is
even harder to combat with than laziness. So, with our plans for the
summer: we outline far more than we can actually accomplish but it is
an incentive and we push onward and upward."

"Who chose the last tree?" called Elena, during the silence that
followed upon the little lecture.

"Nita found a Christmas tree," replied Jane.

"That is a pine tree--of the family of _abies_. Spruce, fir, pine,
and others all come under the family name. You will always see a pine
tree grow straight up, unless some obstacle turns aside its natural
tendency. The pine wood is composed of cells that are filled with piney
sap. It is a long-lived tree, there being on record pine trees that are
2,000 years old--a report says some pines in the Holy Land have been
found that register an age of 3,000 years. The timber of pine trees is
very useful for hardwood building purposes and the sap is used for
the manufacture of turpentines, oils and resins. The limbs grow on an
almost horizontal line from the tree and the offshoots of the limbs
follow the same strange line. The greens form in a flat shape almost
like a fan, and when young and tender make the best of camp beds. When
a tree is utterly decayed the wood forms pitch and tar."

"And in December, the tree is in great demand by all children for
decorative purposes!" added Zan, as Miss Miller finished her discourse.

"Yes, I find I always forget the most important item, or at least Zan
thinks so," laughed the Guide.

"My! I never knew so much about wood in my life!" exclaimed Elena.

"Trees, my dear! don't call these magnificent tall giants by so common
a name as wood!" corrected Zan.

"I guess there aren't any other varieties in these woods," ventured
Nita, looking about for a new species.

"Oh, yes, there are. I have seen a dozen more in a short walk," replied
Miss Miller.

"Here's a kind we haven't had. I don't know what it is, though," said
Jane.

"That is a birch tree. Haven't you ever chewed birch bark?" said Zan,
disdainfully, at Jane's ignorance of a birch.

"I've tasted birch beer but I don't like it!" said she.

"Birch flavour is used in soda water, candy, and soft drinks of all
kinds. It is also in great demand for flavouring obnoxious medicines as
it disguises the disagreeable taste," said Miss Miller, adding, "Who
can describe the birch tree?"

"I don't believe any of us can; I was the only one that knew what sort
of a tree it was, and that is all I can tell," admitted Zan reluctantly.

"The Latin for birch is "betula." Its flowers grow in catkins and bud
in early spring. The tree is often as high as seventy feet. The wood
is highly prized by cabinet makers. The bark is so durable that it has
been found intact after the tree has decayed. Often a woodsman will
come across a birch that seems to be newly fallen. He will strike in
with his axe to ascertain the value of the timber and the bark will
split showing a hollow inside, or at least a mass of decayed wood.
The bark is very useful for the building of canoes, dishes, wooden
utilities, and even hats.

"The mahogany birch grows in New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania, to
the height of seventy to eighty feet and is two to three feet thick. In
spring the rich green leaves of this tree are covered with a thick down
almost like hoar frost. It is beautiful at this season. Later, this
down disappears and the leaves remain a bright green. They are oval
shaped, and pointed at ends. The timber of the mahogany birch is a hard
close-grain and of a reddish brown colour."

"Mother just got a new chamber suite of furniture that she bought for
mahogany and told all of her friends at the bridge club about her
magnificent mahogany furniture for her guest-chamber. When the club
met at our house she took the ladies in to show off the furniture.
Mrs. Dewitt said, "Why, my poor dear Mrs. Brampton, you were cheated
if you bought this for mahogany!" My mother got awful mad at first,
then another lady told her the wood was stained mahogany and was
known as mahogany birch. Mother sent it right back the next day and
said she would never trade at that place again. But the man tried to
explain that the furniture was called mahogany, and at the price she
should have known that it was birch. Now _I_ will know how to tell the
difference between birch and real mahogany, won't I?" said Nita eagerly.

"Yes, but I trust you will be able to use your knowledge for a better
purpose than just discriminating in furniture. The simpler your
furniture the less mental work you will need to think of it. That gives
your thoughts so much more time for happier work and ideas," replied
Miss Miller.

"I see a tree over in that little dell that looks as if it had nuts
growing on it," said Hilda.

"I guess it has, for it is a beech tree," replied the Guide. "Can you
describe any of its points?"

"We have gathered beech-nuts every year, Miss Miller, and Mrs. Sherwood
and mother have pickled them. Umph! but they taste good in winter!"
said Zan.

"I have never tasted them but I have heard of the delicious flavour
when eaten with cold meats," replied Miss Miller.

"I can tell a beech from another tree by its leaves, but I don't know
any of its growing points," added Zan.

"Well, the beech is not a very well-known tree--I mean it is not as
commonly seen on the lawns, street-parquets, or parks, as the oak,
maple, or elm. A beech tree often grows to be a hundred feet high and
is from three to eight feet thick. Some have had a diameter of eleven
feet. The bark is smooth, ash-coloured. The timber is fine grained and
the roots of the tree do not go deep down, but spread out underneath
the surface of the ground. The foliage of the beeches I have seen are
purple, silver, and red. The name to designate the kind of beech tree
is given by the colour of the leaves."

"There, that's ten trees!" called Nita.

"No, that only makes nine?" contradicted Jane.

The girls counted on their fingers and found there had been nine trees
described so that they could always tell at a glance what the tree was.

"I am going to choose the tenth tree myself," said Miss Miller.

"Yes, yes, do!" cried the girls, in chorus.

"Well, I am going to select an elm. You won't see it here," laughed the
teacher, as every head turned looking for the elm tree. "I am going to
tell you about it and then see which of you can be first in identifying
it by my description."

"That will be heaps of fun--I think that will be better than the way we
have done!" exclaimed Elena.

The others felt much the same way, but said nothing as Miss Miller
began.

"Our American elm, or white elm, is a majestic tree with long pendulous
branches. The trunk grows from three to five feet through, and the
tree's height is from fifty to seventy feet. The main trunk grows
straight naked, until it towers above its neighbours. It then divides
into two primary branches which ascend gradually and subdivide into
spreading boughs. These again subdivide into smaller twigs, and the
twigs into leaves.

"As the limbs grow out into smaller branches they bend in the most
graceful curves, and the beautiful foliage gives a dense shade. The
leaves are short-stalked, oval-shape, with irregular veins. The Elm
flowers in April before its leaves begin to shoot. The timber is tough,
strong and not easy to manipulate in cabinet work, therefore is not in
such demand for this purpose."

"I believe I can pick an elm after that lesson," said Elena
thoughtfully.

"Well, girls, we must get back to camp, but we will see who is the
first to find an elm."





CHAPTER SIX

THE MUTINY OF NITA


Returning to the Bluff, Miss Miller directed the operations for the
night. Dinner was welcomed by all, as the bath and tramp through the
woods had created a voracious appetite.

"I will build a fire on the lower ledge of rock where the smoke won't
annoy us. In locating a spot for a fire-place it is always advisable to
see to the comfort of the camp, for the wind may veer at any time and
blow the smoke into the faces of the campers. If you can find a place
with a natural shield to act as a screen, you obviate this disagreeable
feature."

The girls stood about watching the Guide arrange her fire implements.
She looked up and, seeing them unoccupied, said, "Zan, suppose you and
Nita run to the house for the pans we left in the cupboard. Jane and
Elena will go down to Bill's for a loaf of bread, won't you, dears?
Hilda can help me with the fire."

"Dear me! Miss Miller, why don't you send some one besides me with Zan?
I am too tired!" whined Nita, peevishly.

"I have spoken, but you girls can act as you see fit!"

"All right, then; Zan, you take Hilda with you and I'll help Miss
Miller," replied Nita.

Miss Miller began picking out the driest leaves and twigs while the
girls stood uncertain of how to act.

"Well, why don't you start?" cried Nita to Zan.

"Waitin' for you!" said Zan laconically.

"Why, Hilda's going with you--I'm going to stay!"

"I must be rattled then, for I sure heard Miss Miller say that you and
I were to go to the house," returned Zan, sitting down on a stone.

"But I am too tired and so Hilda's going with you." And Nita began to
grow irritable.

"Miss Miller is Guide and I was elected Big Chief by all of you. Nita,
you're Little Chief and in my absence you have to take my place. Now,
I'm goin' down to Bill's and see if I can find any more strawberries
for supper, and so I shall have to let you take my place going to the
house. You can select any one of the other girls you want to go with
you," said Zan, with finality.

Miss Miller had to bend low over the wood pile to keep her face from
being seen. In fact, she had to hold her hand so close over her mouth
that her face was crimson. Zan, without a backward look, started off at
a brisk trot down the slope toward Sherwood's cottage.

"Hold on, Zan, we're coming with you!" shouted Jane and Elena.

That left Hilda standing sulkily watching her three friends while Nita
went inside the tent apportioned to her use. Hilda turned to the Guide
and caught a glimpse of her face. With a smile creeping into her own
face she ran over to Miss Miller.

"Aren't you awful mad?" wondered Hilda.

"No, dearie, this is just what I expected when I suggested that Nita
accompany Zan on the walk. It is merely another 'dish-wash' lesson in
another form, but Nita hasn't had it applied to her individual need as
Zan and Jane have. If she rises bravely to the call she will have her
blessing hereafter."

"Oh, Miss Miller, how clever you are! I hope I will 'rise' to my call
when it comes!" sighed Hilda, her admiration shining from her eyes.

The Guide laughed merrily as she replied, "I would rather no one else
heard of my little plot--just keep it a secret!"

"I will, indeed, I will!" promised Hilda eagerly. Then, "What had I
better do--help you at camp or go to the house?"

"Well, you see it is this way. I am only Guide. I tell you what I
think ought to be done and Zan, as Big Chief, orders the camp. She
has exactly the right idea of government and she will make a splendid
organiser some day. I am so pleased at the attitude she took just now
for Nita is her friend and she did not permit personality to interfere
with duty. I also am delighted to find how she grasps the meaning of
Woodcraft and hope this little lesson will prove beneficial to us all."

"Well, Zan said for Nita to take with her any of the girls she chose.
Jane and Elena have gone to Sherwoods so Nita cannot choose any one but
me."

"And has Nita gone?" queried the Guide, giving a look toward the tents.

"Why--n-oo!" returned perplexed Hilda. In another moment, however,
light dawned and she smiled again. "I see! You will wait for Nita to
make the first move."

Miss Miller nodded her head affirmatively and knelt down on the rock
where she intended building her fire. Hilda waited.

"Please hand me those two green logs, dear--just behind me," asked the
Guide.

Hilda took up one log after the other and gave them to Miss Miller, who
placed them carefully in position.

"Now, watch me, Hilda, and then you can see how to build a good
fire-place."

The logs were placed so that they formed a "V" with the wide part about
twelve inches apart. As the logs were about three feet long and six to
eight inches thick, their position left a three-cornered hollow between.

"Now those two forked saplings."

Hilda found the required articles which Miss Miller had cut down with
the hatchet on the tramp that afternoon. They were straight young trees
with the first branches forming the forks. The leaves and slender
twigs had been lopped off leaving a stick of about four feet in length
and having two sharp forks at the top. These saplings Miss Miller now
chopped off at the bottom until she had formed a sharp spike on each
end. She carefully prodded with one until she found a crevice in the
rock where the point could enter. Then she bore down with all her
strength and drove the stick into the ground.

"Why, you've got it close to the point of the logs!" exclaimed Hilda
wonderingly.

The Guide laughed and took up the second sapling. This she drove in
to the soil at the opposite end of the logs. The forks were broadside
to the length of the logs. Next, a stout but supple willow twig was
selected from a small bundle, and laid across the top between the forks.

"Oh, my! Now I see what it is for!" cried Hilda, clapping her hands
delightedly.

The utter ignoring of her presence and the clapping of Hilda's hands
proved too much for Nita's disposition and she came out of the tent and
walked down to the fire-place.

"What shall I do toward supper?" asked she sulkily.

"Oh, I thought Zan asked you to go to the house for her! Haven't you
started?" asked Miss Miller in surprise.

Nita shrugged her shoulders and watched the interesting construction of
the camp-fire.

"I'm too tired! Let Hilda go."

"But Hilda is helping me."

"Well, then let Zan go when she gets back. I'll start to spread a
table-cloth on the flat rock over there shall I?"

"I really cannot change Zan's orders, you know. She is Big Chief, and I
am only Guide."

"That's all nonsense, Miss Miller, and you know it! You have the right
to order us to do just what you think best," snapped Nita.

"You're just a little bit mistaken about the law and order of a
Woodcraft camp. Each one obeys!"

"Then Zan has failed!" exulted Nita. "She was told to go to the
house and she went to Bill's instead. _I_ should have loved to pick
strawberries as well as she!"

"I hardly think you can call Zan's act one of disobedience. It was
rather one of discipline," remarked the Guide.

"Who did she pretend to discipline--me?" sneered Nita.

"That had best be asked each one of herself. I can ask myself and
truthfully say, "Yes, Zan has given me a good lesson in discipline for
my future guidance.""

"Oh, pooh! You're only avoiding an unpleasant conversation with me! I
know as well as any of you, that the whole plot is directed toward me.
I wish to goodness I had never come with you!" And Nita flounced away
in a temper.

"Why! Nita!" gasped Hilda in consternation, as she watched the
retreating figure of her friend.

"Don't 'Nita' me! You're as thick with the rest as you can be! I always
am selected to act as the scape-goat for anything you don't want to do
yourself!" Nita flung back at Hilda.

The Guide kept on with the fire-building as if nothing had interrupted
the lesson Hilda was receiving. She selected the driest bark and twigs
in the heap of wild-wood and heaped them loosely in the pit formed by
the two logs.

"Now, Hilda, you can fill the kettle from the spring up above here,
and slip it over the willow until it hangs in the centre over the
fire-place."

"I never knew what fun a camp-fire could be! Will it burn, do you
think?"

Miss Miller laughed. "It wouldn't be a credit to me if it didn't!"

"But I can't see why you didn't lay the logs parallel?"

"I'll tell you. We have a small sauce-pan, a medium sized frying pan
and a rather large pot. Now, the small pan goes on the narrow end, the
frying pan on the centre where it fits, and the pot on the wider place.
Then too, we can poke wood in and rake debris out of this wide mouth
while the embers remain piled up at the corner inside. The judgment
in using green wood comes from experience. Green wood does not burn,
but reflects the heat of a fire, so that you get concentrated heat
from embers piled up in a pit surrounded by green logs. Also, the top
of green wood will hold pans and pots firmer than stones will, and a
slippery stove is anything but desirable when potatoes are boiling or
fat sizzling in a frying pan."

"Here comes the three girls! And I haven't done anything toward the
supper," cried Hilda, running to the basket where the cutlery and
dishes were kept.

"The loveliest berries, Miss Miller! Bill had some all ready for us
and Mrs. Sherwood baked some of the dandiest biscuits when she did her
own!" shouted Zan, as she climbed up the grade.

"How delicious they look!" exclaimed the Guide as she inspected the
brown dainties.

"What's that?" asked Elena, spying the camp-fire.

The girls ran over and Miss Miller had to demonstrate the interesting
construction. This over, Zan looked about and asked, "Didn't Nita get
back yet? But say, who went with her?"

Not a word came in reply and Zan immediately comprehended matters.
"I'll go now--will some one come with me?"

The two other girls offered and Hilda looked at Miss Miller. For
answer, the Guide said, "Any two of you can help Zan. One will do for
me."

"Let me stay now, Hilda, you were here when the fire-place was made,"
begged Elena.

"Zan, I think it may be wiser to get what is absolutely necessary
to-night from Sherwood's. You have already done more than your share of
duty and another walk to the house and back is taxing the physical too
much at present. A trip to the farmer's cottage will not over-tire any
of you," suggested Miss Miller.

The girls sighed with relief, and started for the slope. When they
returned to the Bluff with the required articles, the camp-fire had
burned up and deposited a pile of red-hot embers in the pit to cook
by. The potatoes were boiling noisily and a lump of butter was melting
in the pan. The cloth had been spread and Elena was hulling berries.

"Where's Nita?" Zan whispered to the Guide.

"In her tent. She has not appeared since her last display of temper."

"Had I better go and tell her supper will soon be ready?" queried Zan.

"No--leave her absolutely alone. If she comes out of her own accord,
the humiliation of accepting food she refused to help prepare, ought to
humble her enough. But, Zan, to-morrow at our Council, we must speak of
discipline and take up the matter of punishment and fines as outlined
in the Manual. I had hoped this would be unnecessary in a small camp
such as ours seemed to promise. However, all future mutiny must be
provided for."

The supper ready, Miss Miller cheerily took her place and the four
girls sat down about the cloth, leaving a vacancy where Nita should
have been.

Before any one had had time to take up their napkin Miss Miller spoke.

"One thing I consider of paramount importance in any circle, or alone.
It is not obligatory to any of you, merely a suggestion. I am not
aware of the religious belief of any of you and it is not necessary to
inform me, or discuss it with each other. I have found that discussion
of religious beliefs generally leads to a difference of opinions that
eventually create a bitter strife. True religion has no enmity in its
teachings but produces harmony and happiness for all.

"I think that any one can find God by simply following the highest
leading of their conscience. Gratitude to the Great Spirit is one of
those leadings, but few take time to follow that light. I wish to ask
that I be permitted to follow my sense of gratitude for all the good
bestowed this day, and before partaking of the evening meal, I will
close my eyes in silent prayer to the Giver of all my blessings. Each
one of you can do as you feel is right about this idea, but do not
speak or disturb any other's communion. In the morning, when we are
gathered for breakfast, I shall ask for the same silent interval, to
give gratitude for protection during darkness and sleep."

As she concluded, Miss Miller quietly closed her eyes and remained
absolutely silent for several minutes. The girls looked at her and at
each other without saying a word, then one after another closed her
eyes and also gave thanks to God.

The Guide opened her eyes and waited reverently for her companions
to finish their private thanksgiving and communion. Then, as all had
concluded and opened their eyes again, she drew attention to a nearby
tree by saying, "Hungry, Nita?"

Hiding, with a shame-faced expression in her eyes, Nita stood back of a
tree near the supper. She advanced at the question.

"Your place is waiting, dear," added the Guide.

With an air of bravado, Nita sat down and began telling of a
boy-cousin who had visited in the Rocky Mountains and had built a
fire-place exactly like the one Miss Miller constructed.

The other girls seemed abashed at Nita's presence for a short time, but
the Guide replied to the girl's hurried talk and soon the others were
drawn into the general exchange of fun and story-telling.

"I'll wash the dishes," eagerly offered Nita, as the Guide rose to
visit the fire and see if the water was boiling.

"All right, Nita, then the three girls who did double duty by going
back and forth twice to Bill's can lay down on the moss and rest,"
assented Miss Miller, and that was all that was said to Nita about her
habit of getting out of anything she was not inclined to do. The girls
took their cue from the Guide and rolled over on the grass and watched.

"Elena, after the cloth is shaken fold it carefully in the right
creases. That keeps it smooth and tidy. If it is folded regardless of
ironed folds, it soon looks mussy and soiled. I will take charge of the
left-overs from supper--thank goodness there isn't much--and Nita will
wash and wipe the dishes."

The atmosphere of the camp resumed a serenity fully appreciated by all,
for anger displayed by one made all wretched.

"Girls, we will try to get up at the hour we want to rise every morning
this summer--five o'clock. It is now seven-thirty. Whenever you are
ready to retire say so and we will sing a camp-fire lullaby," said
Miss Miller, as the girls sat about the dying fire too tired to talk.

"I'm ready for bed now," ventured Elena.

"I feel as stiff as anything! My back feels as if it would break!"
added Hilda.

The Guide laughed. "That's from swimming. You'll soon get over it if
you practice every day."

"I hope to goodness I _can_ swim to-morrow. The way I feel now, I
should say I couldn't move in the water!" laughed Elena.

Nita said nothing but she must have felt as lame as the other
beginners; as all seemed to long for bed, Miss Miller rose and
smothered the few red coals by covering them with dead grey ashes.

"Never leave a camp-fire with a spark of fire in it. At early dawn, or
at least past midnight, fire always revives and, unless its flame has
been choked by outside means, it flares up and consumes anything in its
reach."

"Miss Miller, I wonder why it is that, without apparent fuel or
fanning, fire will renew itself during the wee hours of the night!"
exclaimed Zan.

"I never heard, but it is an interesting suggestion, Zan. We'll have
Elena make a note of that in her book so that we will remember to ask
that question at Headquarters when we visit there."

"Do you ever expect to see them?" asked Hilda, meaning the officers of
the Woodcraft Indians.

"Why, certainly! Don't you?" returned Miss Miller.

"I didn't know but that we'd be a nuisance. So many members call, I
suppose," replied Hilda, with consideration.

"Hilda, that's very good of you. If every member was as thoughtful of
the time of the Founders, how much better it would be."

No one stirred that night, for every one was healthily tired and repose
was natural. Even Miss Miller set a small alarm clock to awake her at
five, for she thought she might over-sleep during the cool hours of
early morning.

At five, the ringing of the alarm awakened every one; while the girls
yawned and wished it was midnight, the Guide jumped out of bed and
looked at the wonderful appearance of Nature. Dew-drops sparkled in
the rising sun, and the Falls sent forth a new note in its musical
repertoire. Even the grey surface of rock seemed to be of warmer and
softer material than it had been in the twilight.

"Girls! Up--up--up! The day is glorious!" called the Guide.

"So is the bed!" returned Hilda, yawning aloud.

"I just heard a crow laughing at you!" retorted Miss Miller.

"'He who laughs last laughs best,' I've heard said!" came from a
smothered voice in Hilda's tent.

By this time the girls were thoroughly aroused and soon the talk
consequent upon beginning a new day, came from the tents.

"Miss Miller, are you going to take a dip this morning before
breakfast?" called Zan.

"No, I've already used the modern wash-basin by the creek," replied the
Guide.

Nita and Elena came out and found Miss Miller brushing her hair before
a tiny mirror that had been hung from a stump of a bough near her tent.

"Where's the basin you spoke of?" asked Hilda, also coming out.

"Over there by that laurel bush: I think it is Tennessee marble--it is
veined exactly like it," said the Guide.

The girls ran over laughingly and found a great round stone partly in
the water, and in the top of the stone, a nicely hollowed place about
the size of an ordinary wash-basin. At one side a tiny hollow made an
admirable soap-dish.

"How did you get water into it?" cried Nita.

"You'll find a tomato can near the bush!" replied Miss Miller.

"That's easy--but how under the sun did you empty out the water
afterward?" called Zan.

"I didn't carry the basin to the woods and turn it over, I assure you,"
laughed Miss Miller; "I took a handful of dried moss and let it soak
up the used water. You'll see how nicely it absorbs the moisture. Then
take a handful of clean moss and wash the basin out."

"You are too fastidious for me--I'll wash in the brook!" said Zan,
comparing the amount of work necessary in using the rock-basin, to the
easier way of dipping in the creek.

"Guess we'll choose the brook!" said Hilda.

Miss Miller watched the five girls bending over and joyously splashing
water at each other, as well as over their own faces and necks, and
thought to herself: "Yes, I took a lot of trouble to use that basin,
but they will always remember that dry moss will soak up moisture if a
dry condition is required."

For breakfast that morning, the Guide mixed some batter for pancakes.
The girls heard the beating of the spoon and gathered about curiously.

"Batter cakes, girls. I'll mix them this time, and one of you can watch
them bake. The others can look after other work. I'll prepare some
cocoa, if you like."

"Oh, yes! We all like cocoa, Miss Miller," said Hilda.

"Here comes Bill Sherwood--he's got something!" announced Elena, who
had been standing on the rock above the fire.

The others craned their necks and Zan added, "Bet anything it's
something good to eat!"

And so it was. Bill bobbed his head smilingly to the girls and offered
Miss Miller a plate covered with a home-spun towel.

"The old lady fried some spring chicken for breakfast an' we said we
rickoned it might taste good t' yuh--so here it is!"

"Broiled chicken! But, Mr. Sherwood, you must allow us to reimburse you
for the chickens. It would not be right for us to eat your broilers!"
said Miss Miller, deeply obliged.

"We likes t' make th' camp enjyable t' yuh all! Mebbe you'll git
straightened out so's yuh kin prepare your own things pritty soon,"
explained Bill.

"Why, we cooked supper last night--and a fine one it was," said Zan,
pointing to the camp-fire.

Bill's lower jaw dropped and he stood staring at the novel cook-stove.
"Laws me! That beats th' Dutch!" ejaculated he.

The girls all laughed and he went over and watched the kettle singing
and the batter cakes baking. "I'll have t' send my ole woman up t' see
these stunts!" said he, starting off again.

Batter cakes tasted fine with broiled chicken done to a crispy brown,
and cocoa was just the right drink with which to conclude the jolly
breakfast party.

Mrs. Sherwood had not yet visited the camp but she put in an appearance
soon after breakfast and Zan introduced her to all of those present.
She inspected the fire-place and looked sceptically at the cots,
saying, "How kin yuh rest on them hard things. Now, I have to have
feather beds all year 'round. And it's s'prisin' how my bones rest! I
never kin go visitin' where folks haven't feathers!"

Miss Miller felt a deep sympathy for the poor deluded woman, and
wondered if it would be possible to convert her to the idea of using a
mattress and hair pillow in preference to feathers.

As their early visitor went back home, Zan said, "Fancy! feather-beds
in this enlightened age!"




CHAPTER SEVEN

WINNERS IN HOME-COOK AND MOKODASSO-WININI DEGREES


During breakfast, the girls commented upon the ability of the Guide to
do anything and everything. As neither of the five girls had taken an
interest in cooking while at home, the experience shown by the teacher,
in preparing meals, astonished them.

Miss Miller tried to make everything she did an object lesson for
the girls, so she mixed the simple batter for the cakes to show
them how easy a matter a nicely browned cake really was. This, she
deducted, would arouse a desire to know more of the cookery art. If
she had selected a difficult dish to prepare the girls might have been
frightened by the process of mixing many ingredients.

"I wish I could do some baking!" said Jane.

"Why not learn now--never a time like the present," said Miss Miller,
smiling at the eager face.

"S'pose I burn something?"

"Then, try again. It is not with the first trial that we always meet
success. Sometimes I have had to do a thing over and over before it was
right," replied the Guide.

"It seems like an imposition to ask you to show us how to cook after
all the other things you are doing for us," remarked Jane.

"Sometimes a little gratitude expressed in consideration for all one
has done before, urges the donor to greater effort. And both giver and
receiver are blessed accordingly," said Miss Miller.

The girls were thoughtful, so she continued, "I am so glad to find you
appreciative of the little I am doing that I am eager to do more; the
lesson in cookery will be one of my expressions of love toward you."

"Maybe we can all watch and learn how to do the biscuits," suggested
Zan.

"Of course; as many of you as wish to take the test in cookery can
begin this morning," replied Miss Miller.

"Right away?" clamoured a few of the girls.

"Hardly; I thought we would clear up the tents, do the chores, and try
the use of the hatchet and knife; when it gets near time for noon-day
meal we can prepare some fish for dinner. Hereafter, I think it wise to
have dinner at twelve and supper at six. That gives us a long afternoon
and a pleasant evening."

"We're ready for anything--where shall we tramp to-day to use the
hatchet and knife?" said Hilda.

"We'll not tramp--we'll stay right here and build a cupboard to hold
our edibles as they should be kept."

"A cupboard! What Humph!" and other exclamations showed the surprise
the Guide's words gave.

"Are we to chop down a few trees and lop off branches to secure the
necessary lumber for the closet?" asked Nita, wondering if the idea
would prove irksome or unpleasant.

"Not at all! I may decide to make lumbermen of you before the season
ends but I'll not undertake it while you all feel so disinclined to do
anything except what your idle fancy suggests. It will take a better
understanding of the Law before you start on timber work."

The Guide spoke in a joking way but her words were aimed at Nita's
habit of laziness and shirking duties.

"I wonder what Daddy would say if he could see us sawing wood and
hammering nails?" said Zan, chuckling.

"My father would say, 'Here, Jane, don't spoil a perfectly good nail! A
girl can't strike it on the head, ever!'"

"I never held a saw in my life," commented Elena.

"Can you saw wood?" asked Zan of the Guide with such vim that the
others laughed heartily.

"Is that some of your slang or was it fact?" asked Miss Miller.

"I meant it--but it _is_ slang, isn't it?" laughed Zan.

"Well, I'll reply--yes, I am very fond of carpentry. At home, I have a
book-shelf, taborette, lamp-stand, and many little articles that I have
made at different times."

"Well, come on, friends--let's get busy on Miss Miller's cupboard,"
said Hilda.

"Better finish the camp work first. If you girls think you can spare
Zan and me, we will go to the house and find some suitable boards. I
saw the tools necessary in the tool-house yesterday," Miss Miller said.

"Why, yes, we have lots of good boards in the cellar, and besides,
there are some pieces of moulding and quarter-round in the hay-loft.
The boys stored it there some years ago when they wanted to build
some rooms in the loft. They never found time, as every day had some
adventure for us when we were first here," explained Zan.

"And you girls can come to the house and help us carry the material to
the Bluff, as soon as you finish the dishes and beds," said Miss Miller.

Zan and the Guide were soon in the low-ceiled cellar sorting pieces
of lumber from a huge heap left there by the contractors when the old
house was renovated. A number of desirable pieces were selected by Miss
Miller who said, "We can take these pieces up to the back porch and
take them to camp whenever we have need of them. I think we can make a
number of articles that will prove useful."

"My! but you have some long boards there!" said Zan, her head on one
side as she surveyed the load the Guide had piled up for use.

"We won't need many to-day for the cupboard, and we need not worry
about the future," replied she, smiling.

"Then why not leave them down here?" asked Zan.

"I am not so comfortable down in this dark place with no air, that I
would want to call often. We are here now, so the extra lumber can be
taken to the upper air when the girls get here."

In a short time, Zan heard the girls' voices and she ran to the side
garden to show them the way to the cellar from the back area. A
trap-door folded down over the area steps when the entrance was not in
use, and opened outward and fastened by means of hooks and screw-eyes
to the arbour built over it.

Miss Miller was waiting for the girls and, after they came carefully
down the steep stone steps, said, "Here are some boards that Zan and I
want piled on the back porch. The ones for our cupboard we will leave
to the last."

"I'll tell you what! Shall we tie the cupboard boards in a bundle
and drag them across the grass to the Bluff?" cried Zan, as the idea
flashed into her thought.

"Ha! Learning to use your thinking-machine, eh?" laughed the Guide.
"But think again, unless you are pining to haul burdens."

"Let's get out of this vault with the boards and talk of machines
upstairs!" said Hilda, stooping to take a long board.

Elena was close behind her and she also picked up a plank. A pile of
kindling wood lay in Hilda's path and she found Nita and Jane in her
way if she turned aside, so she endeavoured to climb over the wood.
This would have been all right if the ceiling of the cellar had not
been so low; as it was, the end of the board that tipped way up in
front and down in the back, struck overhead, and threw Hilda backward.
The board fell on the kindlings while Hilda stumbled over Elena, who
was intent upon getting her plank to the cellar-door. Hilda's sudden
impact made Elena drop her burden. Jane dodged the plank but Nita had
no time, so the end of the board came down on her toe.

"Wouw! wough! Oo-hoo!" yelled Nita, dancing on one foot while she held
the other foot in both hands.

Elena had bumped her head on some short boards Zan was about to carry
out, and the expressions on both Elena's and Nita's faces were so funny
that the others had to laugh although they immediately apologised for
the lack of self-control.

"Well, I just guess you wouldn't see anything funny in _your_ feet!"
whined Nita, still holding her toe.

"We were not laughing at your funny feet, but at your ridiculous face!"
retorted Jane.

"Perhaps we will all use more caution in our next attempt to get out of
this," ventured Miss Miller, skirting about the girls and reaching the
area steps with her lumber.

As no further sympathy was vouchsafed the two girls, they soon followed
their companions up from the cellar. After all the extra lumber was
piled up on the back porch, Miss Miller invited the labourers to rest
under the front oak tree.

"As Zan was saying in the cellar, the next thing is to get our boards
over to the Bluff," said Miss Miller, when the cool breeze had
refreshed the girls.

"Zan said to tie them up and drag them over! Is there any difference
between boards and bundles being carted by Nancy?" asked Hilda.

"Of course not! I forgot!" admitted Zan.

Miss Miller laughed at the relief shown in the faces around her. Also,
at the progress the girls were making in the use of their thoughts.

"Dear, dear! That means some one will have to get Nancy!" continued
Zan, after a minute's pause.

"But your private wire from the house to the cottage is not out of
commission, is it?" asked the Guide.

"No-oo! but how will Nancy get here unless Bill leads her?" wondered
Zan.

"Bill has to visit the garden and out-houses every morning, he said
yesterday, to see if there is anything wrong. Why not ascertain on the
'phone if he has left his home. If not, he can ride Nancy over and we
can use her going back; at the Bluff we can let her go down to her
stall alone."

Before any comments could be given, Zan had jumped up and was running
toward the house to call up Bill.

While waiting for the farmer to bring Nancy, the Band members went to
the tool-house and selected what material might be needed at camp.
In one corner of the place stood a partly demolished express wagon,
such as children play with. Miss Miller saw it in a glance. It also
happened that Zan saw it.

"Say, Miss Miller, won't the dragging boards cut up all the grass?
Besides, Nancy can't climb over stone walls and snake fences!" declared
she.

"What would you advise?" came from Miss Miller.

"Take the wheels of that broken wagon and tie two under the front of
the lumber and two under the back end. Then, Nancy can go around by the
road and up to Sherwood's cottage, where we can let her drag it up the
slope."

"Splendid! Zan, you may consider yourself promoted into the class of
advanced thinkers!" commended the Guide.

Zan smiled with pleasure and Hilda remarked in a teasing voice, "Hump!
just see Zan preen her feathers!"

The wagon was quickly taken apart and pieces of wire found in the
closet which was a catch-all. By the time Bill came up the road with
Nancy, the impromptu vehicle was ready to hitch to the horse.

Bill chuckled at sight of the dray, and tipped his old farm hat on one
side of his head. "That there's anuther patent o' th' teacher's, hain't
ut?" chuckled he.

"Nop! This time you've got to hand me the bouquet!" smiled Zan, proudly.

"Wall, yuh gals'll all be comin' along fine, pritty soon, with such a
smart lady as Miss Miller," commented Bill.

He watched the party drive Nancy down the road with the funny wheeled
apparatus rattling after, and then went on to inspect the gardens and
out-houses.

It was the first time that the members of the Band had walked along
the road that ran through a section of the farm. When they neared
Sherwood's place, a small section of woodland lay before them. The
shade was dense and the ground damp as the location was rather low at
the foot of the slope. Fern grew to a great height and wild flowers of
every kind blossomed profusely.

"Almost feels like the forests in Florida," said Jane, who had visited
the southern part of Florida with her mother.

"Have you ever named these woods?" Elena asked Zan.

"No, we never come this way, much," replied Zan.

"Then let's call it 'Everglades'--it's a lovely glade and the dampness
and luxuriant vegetation will bear us out in the name," suggested Elena.

"Now, perhaps, as we have had lots of rain this season; but you'd find
it a far different glade during July and August of a dry season,"
replied Zan.

When the travellers reached the bridge that spanned the creek, and
looked up at the Bluff from a new point of view, they were surprised to
see how high their camp seemed to be above the road.

"I didn't know the camp was visible from the road," said Nita.

"I had never noticed the road from the Bluff, did you, Miss Miller?"
asked Hilda.

"No, I hadn't thought of looking for it, yet I knew it must be in
plain sight, as it runs by Bill's cottage and that is in full view from
our tents."

"Let's sit down on the bridge and rest a bit before taking that climb,"
suggested Nita.

"I never did see any one get as tired as you do, Nita. When it is
anything that you don't particularly fancy, you are the most tiredest
person!" said Zan, impatiently.

"Well, come to think of it, I don't see why it was necessary for me to
help when there are so many other useless hands here--Nancy is doing
all the work!" retorted Nita.

"You'd better get rid of all the ire you have stored up, Nita, for
we are going to pay fines for every mistake--I said mistake for
politeness' sake--after our next council!" warned Zan.

Nita laughed musically, but Zan knew that laugh and was aware that Nita
was in one of her most stubborn moods.

She sat down on the heavy cross-bar of the bridge to rest but the other
girls had no desire to wait, and Nancy kept on going until the foot of
the slope was reached. Here, the wheels were removed and the load of
wood was dragged up by the ropes.

With the lumber deposited on the Bluff, Nancy was given a piece of
sugar and discharged from duty. The old horse stood watching the girls
for a short time until Zan spied her standing in the foot-path that led
down to the cottage.

"Just look at that horse? Did you ever see a more intelligent look in
a dumb animal's eyes? She seems to say, 'What under the sun did you
want those old boards for--I'm going to wait and see!'"

The others turned and laughed at Nancy's look. At that the old horse
turned and went down the hill.

"There, now she's insulted at our laughter!" said Miss Miller.

The girls undid the rope that held the wood together, while the Guide
went to her tent and gathered her books and papers. Coming back to the
group she said, "We will hold a council before further work or play is
proposed."

"But Nita isn't here--she stopped on the bridge," said Jane.

"I'm afraid Nita will be tardy then, or perhaps miss the meeting
altogether!" replied the Guide, positively.

The girls were beginning to understand their teacher better than they
had ever thought of comprehending any one; not from her words, for
she did not need to say much when her face and voice expressed so
much. Thus, they knew that the council called was because of Nita's
delinquency.

"Zan, as Big Chief, you will call the roll," said Miss Miller.

This was done and Elena was called upon to read the entries in the
Tally Book.

"Now, girls, we must recognize our obligation to each other and not
feel as if this camp was started for pure pleasure and indolence. We
must feel that a certain amount of fun combines with study or work to
make the time well spent. I detest this constant nagging or advising,
and regret that it seems necessary to talk so much about duty. I wish
to call your attention to a page in the Manual of Woodcraft that I had
no idea would ever be needed for us, under the sub-title of Law and
Punishments."

The girls looked at each other in dismay. To think that one of their
small number should make it necessary to take up the question of
punishment!

Miss Miller read: "Punishments are meted out by the Chief and Council,
after a hearing of the case. They consist of: Exclusion from the games
or boats for a time. Reduction in rank, or of fines, etc. The extreme
penalty is 'death'; that is, banishment from the Tribe. Elena, enter
these items in the Tally Book."

Silence reigned when Miss Miller finished speaking.

"It is high time our Council took note of the stubborn conduct of one
of its members. Last night we were submitted to certain unpleasantness
but later the cause of it appeared contrite. Twice to-day the
appearance of undesirable qualities has turned our thoughts from duty
and pleasure. Now, the Chief is empowered to write down a copy of these
fines and place them in Little Chief's possession. Fine will be omitted
for any cause occurring before she reads of the Council's decision.
After that, penalty will be served on any one committing a fault or
omitting a given duty."

Miss Miller was the stern teacher of the school-class as she spoke and
the girls felt the same awe with which she inspired them at school.

Nita could not be seen on the bridge or along the road, so Zan placed
the paper in their tent on Nita's pillow.

"The Council is adjourned," said the Guide, and they got up with
pleasure.

"Now for the cupboard!" cried Miss Miller.

The boards were measured off the same length, and some of the girls
began sawing them along the pencil-lines. When the boards had been
approved, the two sides were nailed to a bottom section. Then, a top
was fastened to the sides. The girls were beginning to thoroughly enjoy
the construction work and every one was eager to nail the back on the
frame just made. It therefore became necessary for the four to take
turns in placing a narrow board at the back. As four boards covered it
exactly, one girl after the other took her board and attached it. But
Jane had the last board and found it much easier to nail down than the
first girl did.

While the back was being fastened firmly, Miss Miller whittled and cut
six strips of moulding. These she divided, one for each girl and two
for herself. The first two she nailed inside the cupboard on marks made
on the side lengths of the boards. The girls saw at once that these
strips were rests for the shelves.

Three girls nailed their strips on very nicely, but Zan, impatient to
get through with hers, drove the last nail in so that it bent double
and forced the strip down from the pencil-line.

"Oh, bother! Will that do, or must I pull the nail out?" asked she,
looking up at Jane, who was watching the work.

"Guess Miss Miller wouldn't give a reward for _that_!" said Jane,
meaningly.

"Well, out she comes!" and Zan took the hammer and turned it about
to use the forked end on the nail. The head of the wire nail was not
broad and the hammer stripped it, leaving the remains of the wire still
sticking in the wood.

"Did you ever! I s'pose the old thing will come off altogether, next!"
grumbled Zan.

She tried the hammer in every conceivable position but the nail seemed
to be stuck for good. "I'll get you this time!" added Zan, placing the
hammer under the strip and bending back the handle of the tool until
suddenly the strip cracked and half of it came out with the hammer
while the carpenter rolled backward.

Miss Miller and the girls came over to see the cause of the commotion
and the Guide soon found that impatience and carelessness had made
extra work for Zan and delayed the work.

Zan fully appreciated the cause of the accident and felt repentant the
moment she saw the damaged strip.

"Miss Miller, my besetting sin did that! Please let me whittle a new
strip while the girls and you continue making the doors. I was just
crazy to work on those doors and screw on the hinges, but I'll do the
other work as a punishment for impatience?"

Miss Miller heartily approved this attitude and smiled.

"Oh, you needn't show how glad you are that I realise my fault--I find
it much pleasanter to obey my own dictated punishment than if _you_ had
to suggest it!" added Zan, frankly.

The Guide and Zan's companions laughed, for it was a candid statement
of truth. Who wouldn't prefer to endure their own suggested punishments
than follow some one else's?

"In case your punishment is not sufficient to humble yourself and cure
the fault, let us prescribe again," said Miss Miller.

"Foregoing the delight of screwing on those hinges is almost more than
I can stand," said Zan, expressing deepest regret in her voice.

The others laughed again and began work on the anticipated treat.

Zan finally whittled a strip similar to the Guide's and this time it
was nailed on accurately. The hinges were on the two plain boards that
would act as doors of the cupboard and Miss Miller held one in place
while the girls screwed them to the side boards. When both doors were
on, the finishing touch was the screwing on of a bolt.

Elena whispered something to Miss Miller and the Guide smiled at Zan,
who had stood watching the completion of the closet. "We think that
your punishment was more severe than the crime, so it is suggested that
you be allowed to put in the last screw. Here is the bolt."

"Wh-eee!" squealed Zan, as she jumped to take the screw-driver from
Jane and sat down in front of the door and began to fasten the bolt to
the door. The others stood close behind and watched, thereby failing to
see Nita creep up through the woods and go in her tent.

"Done, giminy crickets! Isn't it a peach!" cried Elena, her hands
clasped in admiration.

"Did that rule become effective--about slang?" asked Zan, comically.

"That was an important matter the Council failed to discuss this
morning," admitted the Guide.

"Well, don't inflict punishment to-day--the cupboard is too much for my
balance!" begged Elena.

"Then one day's grace is allowed the three members who are so given to
crime. Hereafter, the fulness of the law will be meted out!" returned
Miss Miller.

"The Chief will have to punish herself some more," laughed Hilda.

While some of the girls shifted the cupboard up to the spot near the
fire-place where it would be most convenient, Miss Miller walked over
to the tents to replace the papers and book of the Band. She thought
she saw something move in Zan's tent, and going over found Nita on the
cot, pretending sleep.

When the Guide rejoined the girls she said nothing about finding Nita
in the tent. The girls, however, were too busy to notice anything in
the Guide's expression and the moment she was within hearing, Zan
cried, "Ants! Miss Miller, what shall we do to keep out bugs?"

"And supposin' it rains hard! Won't the water leak in?" wondered Jane,
examining the wide chinks.

"I'm afraid it will," laughed the Guide.

The girls stared at her and Hilda asked, "What was the use wasting time
on something that leaks?"

"But you've learned the use of tools and constructed a useful article
as well. The cupboard will prove most useful as you will find," replied
Miss Miller.

"There then, Elena, you've got a swell entry for the Tally Book!"
announced Zan.

"And Zan is making most of her day of grace!" laughed Miss Miller,
looking at her watch.

"How long did it take us, Guide?" asked Hilda.

"What time do you think it is?" asked Miss Miller.

"Must be 'most eleven," ventured Jane.

"Oh, no, it isn't more than ten," added Elena.

"It is ten minutes to one!" announced the Guide.

The girls were amazed. "Where _did_ the morning go?" Zan wondered.

"So, you see, we must prepare lunch. And I was so eager to take you
over to the garden and look over the vegetables to select some for our
meals," said Miss Miller, with regret.

"And Nita's not back yet! I forgot all about her in the fun over the
cupboard," said Zan, looking toward the bridge.

"Nita is in her tent. She was there when I returned to my tent with the
papers," said Miss Miller, quietly.




CHAPTER EIGHT

WHAT HAPPENED DURING A THUNDER STORM


No further remarks were made to Nita, but every one wondered if she
realised the importance of the written law which had been pinned to her
pillow where she must have seen it.

For the next hour the Band was very busy preparing dinner and then
removing its traces. Nita did not join them and no one felt inclined to
go and coax her out of her sulks.

The food was placed in the cupboard and Miss Miller made two
propositions: A walk to Baldy Pate on a Nature Quest, or a swimming
lesson. As both could be enjoyed, it remained for the girls to say
which should be first.

Zan explained. "If we go on a hike we'll be warm on our return and a
swim will feel good and cool us off."

The others agreed, so Hilda was sent for the whittling knife and Zan
for the hatchet. Miss Miller went to her tent and took a small bottle
of chloroform and several layers of absorbent cotton, besides a few
specimen boxes and a butter-fly net. Jane had a note-book in case they
wished to enter any items. Nita had not appeared, so the Band started
without paying any attention to her, knowing it to be the kindest
procedure in the end.

They had not gone a hundred yards when Miss Miller suggested that each
one go a different direction through the woods and meet on the top of
Baldy to rest and relate experiences.

The idea met with approval and each one started alone to find a new and
adventurous way leading to the mountaintop.

While the members of the Band were blazing unique trails leading to the
top of Baldy Pate, Nita crept from her tent and read the note which had
been pinned to her pillow. She threw it down on the ground and stamped
upon it with her heel, simply because there was no other way to vent
her spite on the innocent paper. Looking about for something to do, she
spied the cupboard. With a shrug of her shoulders, she ran over and
flung open the door. She was famished for food, so she took all she
wanted to eat and threw the rest out in the pool where the current soon
carried the bread and lighter edibles away, but the heavy particles
sunk to the bottom. Finding nothing she could do to cause discomfort to
the other girls, she decided to take a walk along the road she had seen
when she rested on the bridge. The sun was blazing down, so Nita took a
sun-shade she found in Miss Miller's tent and started on her lonesome
adventure. But she felt sure there must be some other estates near the
Baker Farm, and perhaps she might meet some young folks--who knows!

Miss Miller, being an adept in the woods, reached the top of Old Baldy
some time before the girls did. As she sat on the high brow of Baldy
admiring the wide view down the valley, she followed with her eyes the
ribbon of silvery water that wound from the Big Bridge, through the
woods, coming out in a great green meadow where many horses grazed. A
yellow roadway ran parallel to the stream where it issued from cover of
the woods, and Miss Miller saw a tiny form--or it seemed tiny from that
distance--carrying a purple parasol, and beside her stood an English
dog-cart with a young man in it. Miss Miller wondered where she had
seen a purple sun-shade something like that one! She had not noticed
particularly the one Zan took from the house in case it would be needed
some time for Miss Miller's comfort.

The Guide then looked about her and found the mountaintop covered with
low bushes of berries. "Blue berries--so early!" exclaimed she, and
began picking them while waiting for her charges' arrival.

One after another the girls came up their particular trail, with
stories of what they had seen on the way. While waiting for Elena to
appear, they lay in the short grass on the summit. Miss Miller had
filled her butterfly box with berries and now sat down.

"The clouds over the valley seem to threaten a storm," said she,
turning about to examine the sky overhead and behind her.

"I thought I heard a faint rumble a moment ago," added Hilda.

"Oh, no, you didn't," replied Zan. "That was a farm-wagon rumbling over
the Big Bridge."

"Where is the Big Bridge, Zan? We haven't seen it yet, have we?" asked
Jane. Thus the subject was turned from any reminder of the storm.

"No, it is down at the end of our property just where it connects with
Hamilton's place. The river is quite wide there, as several small
streams flow into it after it leaves Bill's place."

"Girls, if we had a few more berries, I could make a berry pudding,"
said Miss Miller.

"Then we'll pick some more," returned Elena, rolling over to rise to
her feet.

As she did so she came directly under a berry bush and took hold of
it to assist herself in rising. A piercing scream frightened her
companions speechless.

"Augh! A snake! I grabbed hold of a nasty old snake!" she yelled,
shaking herself and trying to wipe the contaminated hand on the grass
in a mad frenzy.

The others ran over to see the snake and Zan said, "He didn't bite, did
he?"

"Mercy no! Wasn't it bad enough to feel his body wriggle!" sputtered
Elena, nauseated at the remembrance of the touch.

"Don't think of it again! Quick, Elena, change your thought and think
of something else!" came from Miss Miller, as she shook Elena suddenly,
to make her take notice.

"Eh--what!" said Elena, wondering at the Guide's queer action, but at
the same time forgetting to be ill.

"Show me where it went! Hurry--quick! I want to catch it for
observation!" Miss Miller said, excitedly.

"That way--under the laurel! But mercy sakes, Miss Miller! Don't go
near the horrid thing!" cried Elena, now forgetting her nausea in her
anxiety to keep the Guide from the snake.

Miss Miller ran over to the bush followed closely by Elena and the
other girls. No sign of the snake could be seen as, of course, the
Guide knew it would have slipped away long before.

She turned with a sigh of disappointment to find Elena as eager to see
the reptile again as the others were.

"Feeling quite right again, Elena?" asked Miss Miller, smiling at the
girl.

"Wh-y, ye-es! But ugh! It was slippery!" replied Elena.

"Then you forgot to use your 'ready help'! What an opportunity for you
to have won a point in advance of the others. I was the only one who
took advantage of it, so I am ahead in this race," said Miss Miller.

"What do you mean?" asked Zan, puzzled.

"Wouldn't you have screamed and shaken it off, had a snake slid down on
your hand?" queried Elena, amazed.

"If I felt startled, I doubtless would, but I would also have applied
'ready help' the moment I felt as ill over the incident as you seemed
to be. As it was, not one of you appreciated the circumstances to help,
so I had to step in."

"But, Miss Miller, you didn't do a thing!" exclaimed Jane.

"No? I made Elena, as well as all of you, think of something entirely
foreign to the snake. By rousing your interest in another object, you
unconsciously overcame the nausea, and later, I gradually drew your
thoughts back to the very object that seemed to cause your illness,
but in what a different frame of mind you examined the idea the second
time. Well, girls, after all is said and done, it gets down to using
our 'thinking machine more' does it not?" laughed the Guide.

"I guess you're right again--you may go to the head of the class,"
declared Zan.

"Do you know, girls, if I was President of this land I would have a
law made that would make it imperative for every man, woman, and child
to _think_! First of all, to think of what God means to us. Second,
to think of what life means. Third, what does brotherhood really
mean. Fourth, and all, inclusive, to think more of what can be done
to improve the child! The child who will be the future citizen--a
father or mother of future generations! Oh, I tell you, it will take
_thinking_ to lift the curse of the world, and then when one has
thought deeply, to put into execution the good things that came to one
in deep thinking!"

The girls smiled at what they considered Miss Miller's hobby, but they
also admired her vastly for such thoughts.

While the talk drifted into other channels, Jane and Elena sought for
and found some beautiful butterflies which they placed carefully in
the boxes. As they turned to go back to their companions, Elena had an
inspiration.

"Jane, you know it is Miss Miller's birthday the end of this
month--what do you say to our making her a lovely tray with some of our
best butterflies?"

"Tray? How would you make it?" wondered Jane.

"Why, we can send in to one of the department stores and buy the wooden
frame with the glass and back ready-made. By grouping grasses and
butterflies artistically on the cotton under the glass, and screwing
the back on again, we would have a beauty!"

"Sure! That'll be fine, Elena! And why can't we try for a _coup_ at the
same time?"

So the girls decided to write that night and send for the tray, keeping
the whole plan a secret from the others.

Just before the two hunters rejoined the others, a sudden peal of
thunder startled every one. Miss Miller looked at the sky with
apprehension in her eyes.

"Dear me, it is black as ink over Baldy and those two girls haven't
come back yet!" cried she.

"It's surely coming up fast--when a storm comes in that direction,
it's generally a hummer, too!" said Zan.

The sun, which had been shining brilliantly, now was partially obscured
by the scudding clouds, and Miss Miller was about to shout for the
missing girls when they appeared running through the bushes.

"We're too far from camp to make it in time, Miss Miller, and there's
no other shelter near, is there?" called Jane.

"Oh, yes! I forgot to tell you what I found on my trail here," replied
Zan, hurriedly. "Bob and Fiji discovered a cave last summer but they
would never take me there. I tried to locate it but failed. On my way
through the woods I accidentally found the great opening under the rock
and stopped a moment to investigate. It will easily shelter every one
of us!"

"All right, Zan--lead on quickly!" ordered the Guide.

The woods became as dark as evening while the peals of thunder crashed
down and forks of lightning shot about the girls as they ran single
file along the faint trail made by Zan.

"Dear me, Zan, I felt a drop! We will be deluged if you have much
farther to take us!" cried Miss Miller.

"We're almost there--keep up your courage and win a _coup_!" laughed
Zan, trying to cheer the others.

Then after a few more turns in and about the giant trees, she cried,
"Here it is--tickets, please! Have them ready!"

[Illustration: JANE AND ELENA COLLECTING BUTTERFLIES.

  _The Woodcraft Girls at Camp._        _Page 160_
]

It took but a minute for the others to fly after the leader into the
dark interior of the cave. It was made by some huge rocks leaning
against each other with tree-trunks to brace them from rolling down
when the earth had been washed away from underneath. Situated in the
side of the steep cleft of the ravine, with the opening toward the
valley, it proved an admirable refuge.

After every one had assured herself that there was no immediate danger
of the whole side crashing in upon them, Zan explained how the boys
used to play Indians and camp out on fine nights. They had a few
plates and pans on a narrow ledge in the cave, and some hemlock greens
furnished a bed.

"How far from camp is the cave?" asked the Guide.

"Oh, about half a mile! We can follow down the ravine and get to our
camp without trouble when it clears off," said Zan.

The rain swept down the mountain-side in torrents, while livid fire
flashed in at the mouth of the cave accompanied by crash upon crash of
deafening thunder. Miss Miller saw that a few of the girls were timid
and looked fearfully about at the rock-ribbed walls of the cave to see
if they were still in place.

"Don't you girls love to hear thunder roll and crack forth like the
sound of cannon?"

"You really don't mean that you _like_ thunder, Miss Miller?" gasped
Elena.

"Why, yes, don't you? I think the privilege of watching lightning is
one to be taken advantage of every time it is offered."

"But it is so dangerous! Suppose you were struck?"

"I know that the Great Spirit governs our destinies and I have no more
to fear from a streak of lightning, if I am sensible, than I would have
from yonder tall pine," said the Guide.

"But that pine is dangerous, too, in a storm!" said Elena.

"Then let's say, for a figure of speech, my bathtub at home. That I am
as safe out there as at home."

"Oh, well, that's different. Every one knows a bathtub is perfectly
safe, while lightning isn't," declared Jane.

"I see! Then it resolves itself into familiarity with the things you
_know_ about--and the danger of lightning is in its elusiveness at
being studied and not in its power?" laughed Miss Miller, pleased at
the way the girls walked in the trap.

"Mother always closes the doors and windows during a storm and won't
let me sit on the porch, either. Why is that?" asked Elena, while the
other girls forgot their fear in the interesting discussion under way.

"Some people say that a place might be struck unless tightly closed. I
have even heard of folks that refused to have a lamp or light lighted
during a storm, for fear the lightning would follow the path of light.
But that is sheer nonsense. The only thing that _might_ occur from
wide-opened doors and windows is the strong current of wind that would
tear along the floor if the draft was strong enough. This might conduct
the lightning, especially if the rain blew in with the wind, for water
is a great conductor of electricity. Sometimes, the clouds hang very
low and the dart might possibly follow the line of least resistance.
The notion that it will follow in the pathway of a light, is on the
face of it an absurdity, for electricity itself is so much brighter
than a pale shaft from a lamp or gas-jet can be, that it would never
see the latter. Then, too, it would be allowing electricity to have
intelligence to _see_ a pathway of light, and that would be paganism.
All intelligence comes from God, the Spirit, and no current of force,
or object of material sense can rob Spirit of its prerogative. When we
sift out many fears we find them actually based on old superstitions
that have in some way been handed down since the days before the
Christian Era."

"Miss Miller, why is it that a barn is more often struck than a house
in town?" asked Jane, after a short silence.

"I am glad you thought of that, because it is interesting. It is a
positive fact that very few accidents by lightning are recorded in
large towns or cities. Not because there are no tall buildings or
spires for the bolt to follow, but for some unknown reason lightning
does not touch thickly populated places but seeks out solitary objects
in the country, or on mountains and plains. Probably the farmers
know this and that is why almost every dwelling in the country has a
lightning-rod at the corners of the roof. Too, I have often thought
that the chemicals generated by the cattle that stand in a barn have
much to do with attracting electricity. I have even compared cases and
find that a barn where the cows or horses are present, is struck and a
vacant barn that has not been in use for a time, is left intact."

"Maybe you can tell us why pine trees are struck when the other
trees are left without a mark? I have seen pine trees torn and
splintered--ten to one of other trees," said Zan.

"Generally, a pine tree grows up straight and tall above its fellows
about it. A pine having rosin in its sap should prove a non-conductor
for the shaft, so I should say that the cause of its often being a
victim to lightning must come from the fact that its spire pierces the
low-hanging clouds passing over it and thus letting the electricity out
to follow the object that entered the proscribed place. The higher on a
mountain-side the pine grows, the oftener you will find one shattered.
But I have noticed that other tall trees growing on high places, are as
often struck, if the pine is not as tall as the companion trees."

"Miss Miller, who thought of the lightning-rod?" asked Zan.

"Why, my dear, don't you know? I thought every grammar school child
remembered our good old Benjamin Franklin for that! He it was who
brought it down into subjection for mortals to use. Before that time,
people actually believed that God sent it for a warning. In these days,
the man we call the Wizard of Electricity, Thomas Edison, has been able
to harness it for practical purposes to lighten labour and extend the
luxuries of living to mankind."

"I suppose we will experiment some day, and find out that lightning is
no more dangerous than the rain-drops," ventured Hilda.

"It doesn't appear to be imminent though!" laughed Jane.

"What makes lightning, Miss Miller?" asked Elena.

"It is caused by a sudden discharge of atmospheric electricity. The
identity of lightning was discovered by our Benjamin Franklin in
America and Romas in France. There are several kinds of lightning,
forked lightning being the dangerous kind. Heat lightning is seen in
the skies at night after an unusually hot day. Sheet lightning spreads
over a great surface and is of various colours. Chain lightning is
swift, in long rippling lines looking like links of a chain. Globular
lightning is a ball of fire and travels slower than the former kinds."

The girls were intensely interested in the teacher's explanations, but
the rain was ceasing and the thunder sounded farther off.

"Some day we will take up the subject of electricity and look
thoroughly into its claims. When you find out more about it you will
lose much of your dread of it. The same plan might be adopted by
Elena and the snakes. The more she knows about reptiles the less she
will fear them, and the more interesting they become. You will look
upon them as the living creature formed by the Creator. Then, you will
unconsciously extend to them the admiration due them for their various
ways of doing good to the earth upon which they live."

"Ugg! Who could ever admire a snake! After the way that slippery thing
felt when I had a grip on it! I shall never want to hold one again,"
said Elena, shuddering.

"That is why I mentioned it again. If you girls had ever studied that
form of life you would be surprised how beautiful and interesting
snakes are. Maybe we will find time to catch a few specimens and watch
them in captivity. I brought a splendid magnifying glass with me, and
several pads for taking down notes. We can rig up a small shack and
construct some furniture for it; it will be our scientific bureau where
all our insects and other interesting data can be prepared and kept."

"Your plan sounds awfully jolly, if you don't make us catch the
snakes!" said Elena.

"When it comes to providing the specimen we will take turns," replied
the teacher.

The shower passed over as quickly as it had arisen, so the Band decided
to start for Camp. The ground had been very dry and the rain soaked in
rapidly, leaving the surface comparatively dry.

"I wonder if Nita was frightened at the shower?" said Zan, as they
followed her down the trail.

"I'd rather have had company on that Bluff--but it is her own fault,"
said Hilda.

"Oh, girls, see the rainbow--isn't it a beauty!" exclaimed Miss Miller
at this point.

The girls all stopped and admired the wonderful hues in the bow and
Jane asked, "What makes a rainbow, Miss Miller?"

"Look, girls! There's another one--right near the other!" cried Zan,
pointing.

"There usually are two, according to the brilliancy with which the sun
reflects upon the opposite clouds when they are resolved into rain.
Look at those two carefully! See the lower one is brighter than the
second one. Also look quickly before it fades and see that the colours
are reversed in their order; and in one, red is the highest colour,
while violet is strongest in the second."

The girls stood straining their eyes to see things they had not thought
of before. Miss Miller waited a moment to give them time to verify her
statements, then she said, "Every rainbow has seven arcs presenting the
seven colours of the solar spectrum. Sometimes the moon will produce
rainbows but they are of very pale colouring. I could tell you all
about the degrees and rays that go to elucidate facts about a rainbow,
but you would only be in a maze when I was through, so I will tell you
the simple fact of causation, then some other time we might go into
the subject from a scientific basis.

"A rainbow is produced by the decomposition of the white light of the
sun when it passes into the rain-drops, then reflecting from their
inside face; or when solar light passes into drops of water under a
certain angle.

"When we are placed at a certain angle on the earth, we look up at the
spot where the rainbow is said to be, and the sun shining opposite
it produces on the retina the sensation of colours. You never see a
rainbow at high noon, yet the rays of the sun are intense enough. But
there is no reflection at noon, upon clouds that you can see. There may
be a rainbow at that time somewhere in the clouds, but _you_ can't see
it.

"The geysers in the National Park out West produce the same phenomenon,
but in not such brilliant colourings. Sometimes, a double rainbow
appears over Niagara Falls, and on almost any clear day you can see one
large rainbow."

The girls listened to the interesting explanation while following the
Guide down through the ravine. As they neared the Bluff, the sun began
shining again in unclouded brightness, and only the drops of water on
leaves and rocks told one of the shower.

Arrived at camp, everything was found to be in good condition, the
tents having shed water beautifully; the Guide's selection of site
proved wise inasmuch as the rain drained away from all sides of the
spot where the tents stood.

Zan ran to her tent to see if Nita was sleeping. But no one was there.
She came out again and looked at Miss Miller in astonishment. The Guide
expected to hear that Nita had gone to bed to hide her ears from the
thunder, and was surprised when Zan told her that Nita was not to be
seen.

"She took refuge with Sherwoods' when the first peal of thunder
sounded," said Miss Miller.

"I'll run down and let her know we are back. If she wishes to join
us, all right, but I won't coax her to," whispered Zan, and the Guide
nodded her approval.

But Zan came back alone after a long interval. She expressed concern in
her face when Miss Miller asked about Nita.

"Mrs. Sherwood said she saw one of the girls coming down her foot-path
with my mother's purple sun-shade. She was surprised and watched her go
along the road that leads to the Big Bridge."

"There, now! That is where I saw that purple parasol! I sat on top of
Baldy while waiting for you girls and as I looked at the valley view I
spied a tiny form walking along the road with a dash of purple over her
head. I sat wondering where I had seen a purple sun-shade--it seemed
quite recently. But now I remember you carried one from the house when
you brought some of the luxuries," said Miss Miller.

"How far is the Big Bridge, Zan?" asked Jane.

"Let's walk down there and meet Nita," suggested Hilda.

"Oh, the Big Bridge is at the extreme end of the farm and divides
Hamilton's stock-farm from ours. If Nita walked as far as that, she
would naturally seek shelter at Hamilton's. And Mr. Hamilton would send
her here in a machine, or let one of his hostlers drive her back. Nita
wouldn't walk back--it's too far for her," said Zan.

"Well, then, as the afternoon is far spent, what do you girls say to
our daily swim? We can't start a lesson on gardening to-day, and I
don't believe that any of us want to sew until we are satiated with
farm-life and country sights," ventured the Guide.

"We'll all vote for a swim--the rain has swollen the creek so that the
Falls will make lots of fun for us in the pool," cried Zan, delightedly.

"That's so! I never thought of that!" exclaimed Hilda.

"Hurry up, get undressed!" ordered Zan.

"Will the pool be perfectly safe if it is deeper?" Elena asked timidly.

"Safe as ever--nothing is safe unless you master it!" added Miss
Miller, going to her tent to don her bathing-suit.

"We never thought to write for bathing-suits! We'll have to wear our
union suits again," called Zan, as she entered her tent.

"I remembered while I was cooking supper last night and I intended
drawing your attention to the matter again without directly reminding
you, but Nita's actions caused the subject to fade away. This morning I
recalled it again while I was washing, then I forgot again," admitted
the Guide.

"I'll just hang a note on my tent-flap--then I'll sure remember to
write when I get in," declared Zan.

The bath that day was enjoyed by all, and Elena almost overcame her
timidity of the water. Hilda found she would float naturally if she
relaxed the tension of her fear thought and let herself go in the
water. It was a fine sensation--finding the water would buoy her upon
its face.

After the girls had dressed and Miss Miller planned for supper, they
wondered where Nita could be! She should have been back if Hamilton's
expected to drive her over.

"Zan, if these neighbours have a telephone, can you go to Bill's house
and 'phone?" asked Miss Miller, unwilling to admit that she was worried
over the girl's absence.

"Bill's wire doesn't connect with anything but our house, but I will
run there and get Hamilton's and find out where Nita is," said Zan,
jumping up.

"Jane will go with you for company's sake," said Miss Miller.

Evidently, the information Zan heard on the telephone was of a most
uncomfortable kind, for she hurried back to the Bluff without speaking
of it to Jane, who was supposed to be with her for company's sake.

"Miss Miller, please come over here a moment!" said Zan. Her voice
denoted concentrated anger and annoyance.

The other girls plied Jane with questions, but she could say nothing,
as Zan had not confided in her.

"Miss Miller, Mr. Hamilton himself answered the call, and I told him
who I was and what we were doing down here.

"He said he was glad we were down; Daddy wrote him about our camp, and
said he was to drop in now and then and see if we needed anything he
could supply.

"I told him no, that we were doing fine, but that one of our girls must
have lost herself--was she at his house?

"He didn't speak at once, then he said, 'Did she have a purple parasol
like your mother's last summer?'

"'Yes, yes, that's Nita!' I cried. 'Can you bring her over--she isn't
accustomed to walking very much?' And, Miss Miller, what do you think
he told me?"

Zan was so angry that she almost cried as she spoke.

The Guide soothed her wisely, and said, "Go on, Zan, I am most anxious
to hear the rest."

"Mr. Hamilton drove to the next town's freight station to-day to get
some dog crates and he says he passed a young fellow on the road who
sat in a dog-cart leaning over the side talking to a girl with a
purple parasol. He says the fellow is a Military School cadet, of about
sixteen, who spends his summers at his grandmother's summer place,
several miles farther on from the Hamilton place. Mr. Hamilton did not
wait to see what the two finally did, but he did not see either of them
on his drive back from town."

Miss Miller was stunned. She stood perfectly still for a time, then
said, "Zan, have you ever known Nita to show any preference for boys'
company?"

"Oh, yes. And, Miss Miller, she often said to me, what a lucky girl
Jane was to have a chance to see so many nice fellows! Then, when she
comes to my house, she always acts so silly when Fiji is about. He gets
simply disgusted with her ninny airs and foolish things she does to
attract his attention!"

"Humph! I see!" murmured the Guide, but she did not explain to Zan what
it was she saw.

The two rejoined the girls and supper preparations continued in
silence. Miss Miller had almost decided to send out an alarm by Mr.
Hamilton when she saw Nita coming up the slope.

"Oh, hello, girls! Anybody get wet?" called she, as she came near
enough to be heard.

Although the three other girls knew nothing of Nita's escapade, they
_felt_ that she had misbehaved in some way.

"Nita, can you explain satisfactorily where you have been all this
time--and not have been caught in the rain?" asked the Guide, sternly.

"Oh, I had a nice time! Better than if I had gone mountain-climbing, I
guess. I'm quite old enough to take care of myself, and, you see, I am
safe and sound!" laughed she, with a hint of confusion.

"I see more than you give me credit for! You will get a pencil and pad
at once and write to your mother, exactly where you went and what you
did this afternoon."

"What difference will it make to mother? She isn't down here to take
care of me?" replied Nita, impudently.

"Because she is your guardian by law and she must hear what you have to
say," said Miss Miller.

"But she placed me in your care!" exulted Nita, triumphantly.

"Very well then, come with me and I will hear you--later I will see
what is to be done," came unexpectedly from the Guide.

Nita frowned, but having trapped herself, she could not retreat by
saying that Miss Miller had no right to question her.

At first the stubborn girl would not speak a word, so Miss Miller went
over to her trunk and began unlocking it.

When she found that she must confess or go home, she told, little by
little, about the afternoon's experience.

Finally, Miss Miller heard all she needed to know. Nita had walked
along the road past Hamilton's place until a young man in a fine
dog-cart came by. He mistook her for a dear friend in the city and
stopped to invite her for a ride. When Nita explained that she was not
the friend, he was very charming indeed, and wanted to drive her back
to the camp. She demurred at first, but the shower threatened and he
said she must get in and permit him to take her to his house which was
nearby, until the rain was over. The house was much farther than Nita
dreamed, and they just got under shelter of the wagon-shed in time. She
did not go to the house, as the downpour prevented them. As soon as the
shower was over they started back, but Mr. Everton lost the way and
took the wrong turn. That was what delayed them so long.

"Nita, you will write and tell your mother everything you told me just
now, and anything you have forgotten to say. Will you allow me to read
the letter before you close it, please, as it must be plainly explained
to her. If she wishes you to come home, all right; but if you remain
here, it will be on a very different basis than heretofore. If you do
not write, I will, and I will not interpret your act as kindly as you
may do for yourself!"

Nita began crying, and begged Miss Miller not to send her home. She
wanted to stay at camp. Her mother and father were dreadfully strict
with her and she would have a wretched summer in the city if she went
home.

"Then I should think you would take the same interest in camp as the
others do--if you are sincere in wishing to remain. You have shirked
every given task and made things very unpleasant for all of us, since
we came to camp," said the Guide.

"Well, please, do not send me back and don't write! I'll explain
everything to mother!"

"Sit down and begin. I will have to attend to supper and will look over
the letter afterward."

Miss Miller returned to the fire where the girls were busy concocting
some food that Hilda and Zan said they could cook. As the Guide joined
them, Hilda laughed and said, "I think I'll resign in favour of some
one who can bring something appetizing out of this mess!"

Nita took the pad and pencil from her folio and sat down on a stone
just outside of her tent. "Just as I begin having a lovely time with
Jack Everton! I wonder if that mean old snoop thinks I will let mother
know about my beau! I'll write _two_ letters: one she'll read and
approve for me to mail, and the other I'll hide until she gives me back
the first. Then I'll slip the real one in an envelope and tear up the
other! Mother'll answer and say everything is all right; that she's
glad I'm here, and that she don't want me to come home!"

Nita chewed the end of the pen for a few moments, planning a letter
that would bring back a desirable reply from her mother. The epistle
written, she began the second letter which was to be approved by Miss
Miller, but the call for supper came before she had half finished
writing it.

Nita went over to the group about to sit down and took her place
without a word of apology for not having assisted in the preparation of
the supper.

The silent prayer period was filled with grateful hearts communing with
the Great Spirit, but Nita sat and looked sneeringly at one and the
other of her companions. Not that Nita was irreligious, or that she
scorned to pray, but she was in a mood that would have refused to obey
in anything, no matter how divine.

Immediately after the meal, Nita returned to her letter and Miss Miller
joined her later. When the writing was concluded the Guide read what
had been written and was delighted to find that Nita had confessed
fully the mistake of the afternoon. Miss Miller folded the letter and
turned to address Nita more kindly.

Nita was scowling and, at the Guide's words, flounced into the tent.
"Hateful spy! What right has she to send that letter?" muttered the
girl.

Miss Miller stood silently pondering the sudden change in Nita. Then,
having had wide experience with girls at just this critical age, she
nodded her head comprehendingly, and went inside.

"Nita, do you object to my mailing this letter now?"

Nita refused to reply, but buried her face in the pillow.

"I was wondering if you had any reason for mailing it yourself. If you
have, I will leave it here."

Nita was trying to figure out whether the teacher heard her mutter or
not. Then, realising that she must pretend to be penitent, she said, "I
don't care, Miss Miller, one way or the other! Only, a girl doesn't
like to feel that she isn't trusted to send her letter to her own
mother!"

"Very well, then, I'll leave it on your trunk and you can attend to
it!" replied Miss Miller, leaving it and going out.

It was the work of a minute for Nita to tear the letter into small bits
and then insert the one she had first written. This done, the envelope
was addressed and stamped.

Long after the girls had gone to bed and were asleep that night, Miss
Miller sat by her little stand and wrote a long letter to Dr. Baker,
telling him all about their camp-life and the various things the girls
had already accomplished. Then she mentioned the episode of Nita's
afternoon and asked what he would advise her doing in the matter. She
also said that Nita had sent a letter to her mother and naturally, she
(Miss Miller) would await a reply before taking further steps.

This letter was carried down to Bill's early in the morning before the
girls arose, and Bill promised to place it in the mail-box with one
Elena had given him for the postman.

Miss Miller heaved a deep sigh as she returned to the Bluff, for she
was a conscientious Guide and felt her responsibility to the five
girls. She also made all allowances for Nita, and realised that the
present environment was just the right antidote for her advanced ideals
of company and pleasure.




CHAPTER NINE

WICKEE AND CHEOKEE JOIN THE CAMP


Nita carried her letter to her mother down to the post-box and mailed
it herself. She was not eager to return to the Bluff at once, so she
followed a faint path through the fields and found herself on the
border of the farm-land where the stream broadened out into a sluggish
shallow pond near the bridge. Here, she found great cat-tails and
rushes growing, while birds and bees flew about in great numbers. She
sat down on the fallen trunk of a tree and enjoyed the peaceful scene,
and for the first time since her arrival at the farm, the full beauty
of the place appealed to her higher self.

As is natural with any one, particularly at the age of Nita, the change
from one state of consciousness to another is sudden when conditions
and environment are such as to support it. Consequently, the soothing
of Nature's quiet had its effect on the emotional senses of the girl.
From the appealing scene of the spot and the musical zum of insects, it
was but a step to the next upward thought.

"I did just as I wanted to yesterday--I had a stroll and met a rich
young fellow, but why is it that this simple spot gives me more
real pleasure than the ride and acquaintance yesterday?" wondered
Nita, never realising that outdoor life and wholesome association was
changing her likes and character, slowly but surely.

Had Miss Miller but heard the girl's admission, how relieved she would
have been, but Nita kept her thoughts to herself.

During the girl's absence, the other girls indulged in gossip, as is
most natural with a group at that age. Miss Miller was in her tent
planning some work for the afternoon while the girls were busy making
sets of rubbing-sticks after the model used by the Guide.

"Say, girls, did you ever hear of anything so nervy as Nita's going
off like that?" exclaimed Jane, looking toward the Guide's tent to
ascertain where Miss Miller was.

"Hum! If my mother _dreamed_ of such things she would make me come
right back home!" added Elena.

"I s'pose Nita thinks it is perfectly all right! You see she was
brought up that way and can't gauge actions as we do," said Hilda, in
apology for the absent one.

"I'm glad to hear you say that, Hilda, because my Daddy asked me as
a personal favour to him to bear as much as I could from Nita and do
everything possible to wean her from her habits of the past by helping
her to look at things as we do! I'll confess, she tries me awfully,
sometimes, and I haven't much patience with her weaknesses, but I've
given my word to Dad!" said Zan, flushing at the thought of her
shortcomings in the ordeal.

"How do you suppose she ever met that boy?" asked Jane curiously.

"She just was brazen enough to invite acquaintance! Why, Nita'd flirt
or dance with any one--as long as he had on fine clothes and was an
easy mark to her glances!" scorned Elena.

Miss Miller had come from her tent unobserved and overheard the latter
words. She felt distressed at the attitude the girls took and sat down
beside them.

"I heard what was just said, girls, and I feel that I must add my
opinion to yours. I shall be greatly relieved to know that this is the
last we will hear of the discussion over Nita's short-comings. I am not
reckless enough to permit her to continue this conduct without having
deeply considered every phase of the matter. I am merely giving her,
as one might say, rope enough to hang herself! That is, to let her
find herself and the real enjoyment of camp-life, or let her rush on
until she is too far in to recover her footing with us. I have every
hope now, that she is finding herself and will be one of our best
Woodcrafters!"

To this the girls had nothing to add, so the Guide concluded by saying,
"Please do not discuss this again, and try not to think of it either.
Just leave the case to me and let me handle the situation as I am
advised to do. I am not alone in this plan of regenerating the child,
and it was with the sense of my obligations that I promised to do all I
could."

Miss Miller went slowly back to the tent to get the papers for a
Council and left the girls bending low over their work but no more was
said about Nita's short-comings.

Before the Council convened, Nita came back to the Bluff and took her
place in the semi-circle. After the opening song and roll-call, the
Guide looked over her honour roll.

"Nita, I'm sorry but we will have to give you a demerit for absence at
Council yesterday, and also defer giving you any _coup_ for following a
trail accurately as we did. I know you can soon catch up in this but it
is more fun when we all work together," said Miss Miller.

Nita said not a word and controlled her features admirably at the mild
reproach from the Guide. The marks were placed on the paper and Miss
Miller looked up smilingly.

"Who can claim a reward for not chewing gum for three months?"

"I haven't chewed any since that day in school when you lectured the
class, explaining what bad effects it had on the glands and throat, to
say nothing of the waste of saliva!" said Zan.

"How long was that?" asked the Guide.

"Oh, that must have been more than three months ago, Miss Miller. I
haven't chewed since then either!" cried Hilda.

It turned out that not one of the girls had indulged in gum-chewing
since that day when they heard how the habit hurt one's health
eventually. So Miss Miller was proud to give credit where it had been
won.

"Now, girls, Jane and Zan have won a _coup_ for fire-making with
rubbing-sticks and material of one's own gathering, but no one has
aspired for a grand _coup_ in this line. I should think it to be
a simple matter to practise until the fire could be made in one
minute--try for it and see! At this meeting we will fill out and sign
the claims for fire-making _coups_." Miss Miller then took a number
of printed Honour Claims from her leather case and the two girls each
received a _coup_ claim duly witnessed, and a duplicate to paste in her
Tally Book, while the original would be filed at Headquarters when the
Band was registered.

"I am going to try for a degree in swimming, Miss Miller. I'd love
to have the right of being called _Shingebis_ as you are," said Zan,
eagerly.

"Good! I like to hear that, Zan. And I don't see why Jane couldn't try,
too. The other girls are learning fast and will soon be able to swim
correctly and begin to practise fancy swimming."

"Shall we swim now?" asked Hilda, eagerly.

"Hardly!" laughed the Guide. "I wanted to have the others make the
rubbing-stick fire and at least do a Test for the Degree of Gleeman,
then take a walk over to the garden and find out how many of you can
identify vegetables and fruit trees without being told."

"That will take all morning!" pouted Nita, who was becoming very expert
in swimming.

"Yes, I know. Then we will have lunch and finish sewing on our suits.
Later we will take our daily swim," replied Miss Miller, preparing to
bring the Council to an end.

The Fire Tests were completed and the Band started across the woods
toward the garden. They reached a section of the corn-field where the
beautiful stalks were almost ready to tassel. Between straight rows of
the green corn thick-stemmed vines crept in and out. Here and there a
deep orange flower lifted its head.

"Aren't those yellow lilies a queer kind?" said Nita, stopping to
examine one.

Zan laughed merrily. "They're not lilies, Ninny! They're pumpkin
blossoms!"

Even Nita smiled at the wide difference between the two flowers,
although the form was so similar.

"I never knew pumpkins grew like _this_!" said Elena.

"There's lots of things you girls don't know now, but you will before
we leave this farm!" retorted Zan.

"I don't see what you folks need so many pumpkins for! Just look at
all the vines," said Jane, waving a hand at the large expanse of field
where yellow spots of colour showed.

"Oh, Mrs. Sherwood cans lots of them, and we keep lots in our cellar
through the winter. Dad sends lots to Homes and the boys use dozens for
Hallowe'en night. Last Fall Fiji had over a score sent to the boys at
the Y. M. C. A. for their party."

"If I had a lovely place like this, I'd just love to make others happy
by giving away the things like Zan's folks do," murmured Hilda.

"Yes, and when you think of all the money we spend on visiting
summer-resorts and paying high prices for travel, then compare it to
cost of maintaining a farm like this one, it would about balance each
year, and soon pay for the first cost of a farm," said Miss Miller.

"That's just what Dad said before we took this one. We used to pay
exorbitant rents each Summer for cottages in the big mountain-resorts
or at the sea-shore and only have a few weeks' good out of it. Dad
only paid as much for this farm as it cost him for two Summers' outing
previous to coming here. And will you believe it, Muzzer kept strict
account of everything that year to satisfy herself of the truth, and we
really had more first-class food produced at the farm, and for next to
no cost, to say nothing of the different times we used to come down and
spend week-ends all Fall and Winter, and paid off the cost besides!"
said Zan.

By this time the Band reached the fence between two fields. Here was a
new kind of a vine that looked like the pumpkin vine.

"Oh, and see the cute little pumpkins already forming!" exclaimed
Hilda.

"That's summer squash! Anybody like squash?" said Zan.

Miss Miller had been the last member of the party, for she had stopped
here and there to inspect growing things. She came up to the girls at
Zan's question and replied, "Yes, I like it when it's fresh, and I know
how to cook it, too."

"Then we can have some squash, pretty soon. Bill can pick it when it's
ripe--he knows the right time," said Zan.

"Seems to me, Zan, that the squash vines haven't enough soil to nourish
the roots during the demand made upon its strength by the ripening
fruit," commented Miss Miller, examining the stem where it entered the
earth.

"We'll speak to Bill about that," replied Zan, watching the Guide with
interest.

Having passed through the corn-field, the Band reached the general
vegetable garden. The first plants they found needing attention were
the tomato vines. They had been trained on trellises but many of them
had slipped and fallen with the weight of their own fruit and foliage.

"They seem to be all green leaves!" said Hilda.

"What do you call this--and this here!" exclaimed Zan, exultantly
displaying a cluster of bright green tomatoes.

"They must be late tomatoes, Zan, aren't they?" asked the Guide.

"Yes, the others are down by the barn--we can pick some of them to-day
if you like. Bill says there are lots of them."

"Look, girls! All the cabbages over there. Who'll ever eat them?"
called Hilda.

"Bill sends all we need for winter, and lots that are left over are fed
the cattle. Pigs like cabbage, and all the cows and horses eat it. Even
the chickens cluck over a handful of leaves and peck for hours until
nothing but the heavy vein in the centre is left," explained Zan.

"Zan, you're a real farmer! We never knew how much you understood about
these things!" said Miss Miller.

"I just love the country and everything in it--that's why!" exclaimed
Zan vehemently.

"Well, girls, there's plenty of work for us to do, if you want to do
it. I see lettuce all ready for the table, but the weeds are thick
about it so that you can hardly tell which is lettuce or which is
chick-weed. We ought to clean that out!" suggested the Guide.

Without waiting for consent, Miss Miller carefully stepped between rows
of growing things and reached the lettuce patch. Here she stooped and
began pulling handsful of green weeds that were just beginning to show
a tiny white flower on its head.

Zan followed the Guide and also began weeding. In a few minutes, all
of the girls were weeding out the chick-weed and in a short time the
lettuce bed presented a very different appearance.

"My, how nice it looks! And how much better the lettuce seems to be
already!" cried Jane.

Miss Miller was delighted at the interest manifested by her charges,
and from the lettuce bed she led them to the radishes.

"Oh, the dear little buttons!" laughed Elena, dropping on one knee and
digging up one of the red balls.

"What a small bed--doesn't any of your family like radishes?" queried
Nita of Zan.

"This is only one seeding; Bill plants some seed at different times so
all of the radishes won't be ready at the same time. They're not fit to
eat after they are too large and pithy. These are the second planting.
We have had radishes sent to the city all spring and summer, thus far."

"You are certainly to be envied, Zan--having all the fresh vegetables,
eggs, butter and tender chickens you want!" exclaimed Miss Miller.

"More than we want--Daddy gives loads of farm truck to the Poor House
and the Old Ladies' Home, of which he is the visiting physician."

"I suppose the poor things are as glad to have nice things to eat as
anybody else--we're all human as far as eating is concerned," commented
Miss Miller.

"We may as well pull some of these radishes for lunch, Miss Miller;
they will soon be too pulpy to be good," said Zan.

"All right, but you must show the girls how to pull them out of the
ground--so many smaller ones grow in the same soil and the roots often
twine together. By pulling out one at a time and loosening the soil
first, the younger one will remain safely and continue growing until
large enough to use," advised the Guide.

Hilda had found an old basket near the tomato vines and this was taken
for the vegetables that might be chosen for camp.

After taking the radishes wanted, the Band moved over to the other
patches of vegetables. Miss Miller saw some young, growing beets, and
turned to Zan, asking if she might cut off some tops.

"What's that for--fodder for Groutch?" laughed Nita.

"No, we will have some delicious beet greens for lunch to-day, besides
the lettuce and radishes."

The Guide pulled some parsley, broke off the green tops of some young
celery, and then sought for a few carrots and turnips. They were still
very small but she selected the largest ones. These were placed in the
basket with the other things, while the girls wondered what it was for.

"I believe I see some onions down by the barns," said Miss Miller.

"Yes, they should have been planted away off at the other end of the
garden, as we all dislike onions and they smell horrid while growing!"
replied Zan, pursing her mouth and wrinkling her nose.

"We'll take a few onions, then. I dislike them as a vegetable to eat,
but they are a very necessary item for seasoning or flavouring many
foods," said Miss Miller.

"I am curious to know why you pulled such a small quantity of parsley
and other green things?" asked Hilda.

"I guess you forgot that to-morrow is the day the butcher wagon stops
at Sherwoods'. Bill says that he stops every Tuesday and Saturday, and
we will have to provide meat enough to last for the other days, or go
without it. Personally, I should not miss meat, but you girls have been
accustomed to it every day, and I thought we would learn to do without
it gradually. I am going to give you your first dinner without meat
to-morrow, but you will have a good soup instead. That is why I pulled
these vegetables--for a splendid soup."

"Sounds most appetizing just now, Miss Miller, for to tell the truth, I
am starving!" said Jane.

"With all this stuff around you!" said Zan.

"But it's raw! I'd eat it quick enough if it was cooked!"

They had reached the part of the garden back of the barns and Zan ran
over to the tomato vines and began turning over the thick leaves.
Hanging down near the ground were many great red luscious tomatoes,
and she pulled one off and took a deep bite. It looked as if it tasted
good, and so the other girls followed Zan's lead. Soon, all were
enjoying tomatoes the like of which they had never tasted before, as
the ones city buyers get have been picked before ripe and shipped by
freight. Transportation takes some days and the wholesale market uses
a few days more before the grocer receives them, so they would rot if
they were gathered when good and ripe.

"Um-mm! That was the best thing I've ever tasted!" said Nita, smacking
her lips.

"Let's have another!" suggested Elena.

Miss Miller laughed and gave consent by helping herself to a second
tomato.

"Some of these must go in that soup! And we will take a number of
them for lunch and to-night," added the Guide, as the girls helped
themselves.

"I see some delicious meals waiting for us this summer, as I gaze about
this garden! With that rhubarb almost ready to cut, what pies and stews
we can have! Then, those string beans in that patch of dwarf beans, and
the peas hanging on the bushes--why, there is such an endless variety
growing that we will have to turn regular cooks to be able to enjoy all
that Nature has provided," exclaimed Miss Miller.

"We don't know how to cook, and you shouldn't spend so much time
cooking for us," remonstrated Jane.

"I do not intend to. I'm going to show you girls how to cook your own
meals. The one who won't cook gets no meal!"

What turn the conversation may have taken can never be told, for at
that moment a loud sound came from the barn.

"If I didn't know that Daddy sent our old horse to a pasture for the
summer, I should say that noise was a horse!" said Zan, running past
the others and along the path that led to the out-houses.

The others followed quickly, and were in time to see Zan stand in
astonishment. They joined her and there, in the small enclosure by the
side of the barn, stood a horse looking at them. At sight of Zan, the
animal lifted his nose and neighed.

"Of all things! It's our old pet that we've had here every summer! Why,
Cheokee, how _did_ you get here?" cried Zan, racing over and throwing
her arms about the horse's neck.

Cheokee nosed his little mistress affectionately, while the girls
looked on. "I should think she'd be afraid to go so near a horse," said
Elena, the timid.

"You wouldn't feel afraid of a little poodle, would you?" asked Miss
Miller.

"But a little dog can't hurt you while a big horse might bite or walk
all over you!" replied Elena.

"Not when he knows you, as this pet knows Zan. He is just a great big
poodle--in a way; he is as tame and is as eager to please and be petted
as any lap-dog!"

While they waited for Zan to rejoin them, Bill Sherwood came from the
barn with a pail of water for Cheokee.

"Bill, when _did_ Cheokee come here?" cried Zan.

"This mornin'. I got a wire from your pa sayin' he hed sent orders t'
Hamilton t' leave th' hoss fur you-all t' use this summer. Hamilton's
man came by whiles you'se was up in th' garden. Mebbe Cheokee wasn't
glad t' be home!" said Bill, holding the pail for the horse to drink
from.

"And maybe we're not happy to have him!" ejaculated Zan.

"That means we can take trips through the country, and at times go on
a jaunt and stay all night! Would you girls like to camp out now and
then?" said Miss Miller.

"Would we?" retorted Hilda.

"Just try us, and see!" added Jane, laughing.

The others also joined in the clamour for a trip and an all-night
picnic, and Miss Miller laughed.

"You didn't know what you started, did you?" said Zan.

"Isn't that slang?" asked the Guide.

"Humph! Guess maybe it is--too bad," sighed Zan.

"We're all sorry to give you a mark but it will have to be done if this
slang habit is ever going to be broken," said Miss Miller regretfully.

"Say, you two, why don't you do your part in deserving marks! You're a
lot of quit----" Zan laughingly remonstrated and was just about to add
another mark to her record, but she caught herself in time, before the
last syllable was pronounced.

They all laughed and Miss Miller said, "Now, that's a good sign!"

Zan suggested that they stop at the house and get some jelly and
pickles as the other jars were empty. This done, they took the path for
the Bluff.

So much time had been spent at the garden, that they had just time to
prepare the dinner before one o'clock. The hour for dining had been
twelve, but time flew so quickly at Wickeecheokee, that it seemed
impossible to be ready at twelve.

During the meal, Zan told many clever things the horse had done and how
trusty he was. She then gave an account of the way the boys and she had
christened him Cheokee.

"He's been in our family ever since he was two years old. Daddy used
him for one of his practice horses when he had to have two. Then, when
he gave up going out at night, he kept Cheokee for his day use. We
called him 'Bill' then. Daddy got an automobile a few years ago, and
we came down for our first summer on the farm that year. Of course we
wanted Billy with us. Then we found out that the farmer was called Bill
so we thought he might not like it to have a horse called by the same
name. And besides, we felt that a horse for a doctor and a horse in the
country for fun ought to have names showing their occupations. Bill
sounds all right for the city, but we wanted something fancy for him in
the country. After a lot of thinking Fiji suggested Wick. That didn't
fit. Then Bob said, Keeok. I didn't like that either. After starting
on the name of the farm we kept on until Fiji said, Chokee. That
made us all laugh and Muzzer said it was awful! It made her think of
strangulation. So we modified it by calling him Cheokee, but the boys
_would_ use that name Chokee. We led Bill to the creek and invited
the Sherwoods and some friends of Muzzer's who were visiting us, and
Bob spoke a piece he had rendered at school that term, while Fiji
placed a daisy wreath on the horse's head. I took a brass finger bowl
and sprinkled the water on his head and we named him Cheokee. Then, we
started a song but Cheokee saw Bill coming up the slope with a measure
of oats and he scrambled out of the water and went for his dinner. By
the time he got his nose out of the bucket and looked at us, the daisy
wreath was hanging from one ear, and he had oats clinging to his nose
and face. Oh, that was a funny sight!" and Zan leaned back and laughed
at the memory.

The girls grinned in sympathy, and Miss Miller watched the girl who had
been blessed with a father who had common sense enough to allow his
girl to grow naturally, without any foolish notions, or without wasting
any valuable time over her toilet.

Miss Miller thought to herself: "Zan is youngest by several months of
any member of this Band, yet she has the physique and mentality of a
perfectly healthy girl of fourteen. Then, too, she is so free from
guile and full of intelligence, that she is an admirable associate for
this or any other camp to have with it."

Miss Miller unconsciously turned her eyes on Nita, who formed such a
contrast to Zan. Her very eyes expressed hidden thoughts that she dwelt
upon, but would have been ashamed to admit. Her every action seemed
to say, "I know I am pretty, and I shall make the most of it." Her
indolence, her preference for sweet things to eat, the habit to excuse
herself for any error, or misrepresent facts, all were making their
lines in her face, and later would have seared her soul.

"If I can only prove equal to her!" thought Miss Miller. "I should love
to replace that falsity with a genuine nature, but it must not be at
the expense of my other charges!"

While the dishes were being washed, Jane said, "Could we use Cheokee
for a ramble this afternoon?"

"It would be fun, Miss Miller, and he hadn't far to come this morning,
you know," added Zan.

"Then say we take a short drive and let our bath go until later in the
afternoon. We had planned to sew, but I will admit that no one dreamed
of an addition to our camp that would open new channels of pleasure."

"Can you hitch him?" Elena asked of Zan.

"Pooh! of course! And you'll have to learn how, too."

"Oh, I'd be so 'fraid to get up close!" shivered Elena, laughingly.

"We'll take all of that fear out of you before you go back home, young
lady," threatened Zan, grinning at her delicate companion.

The girls soon had the big surrey pulled out of the carriage-house
and Zan led the horse out of the enclosure. Miss Miller assisted in
harnessing one side while Zan did the other. The girls stood by and
watched with interest.

"Who'd ever think Zan could do these things when you see her at
school?" said Jane.

"Or at dancing school?" added Nita.

"Which goes to prove that a lady is always a lady no matter what tasks
she does, as long as she remembers her birth-right!" ventured Miss
Miller.

At the signal from Zan, the girls climbed in the surrey, with Elena,
Zan, and Miss Miller on the front seat.

Cheokee knew it was to be a lark, and he started off with one of his
prancing steps. The girls laughed and shouted at every thing they
passed, until Zan turned the horse into a beautiful woodland road. The
trees were so thick and tall that but little sunshine ever penetrated
to the road. It was consequently cool and dark in the woods.

Miss Miller turned to speak to Elena and was struck at the look on
Nita's face. She turned about to see what caused it, and saw a dog-cart
coming from the opposite direction. She knew intuitively who was
driving the high-stepping horse. There was no room to pass each other
on the narrow road, and the banks rose over three feet on either side.
There was only one thing to do. The young man jumped down and took his
horse by the head, backing him along the road until a small spot was
found where he could turn out and permit the load of girls to pass. He
stared impudently at Zan as he knew she was the doctor's daughter,
camping at Wickeecheokee. He raised his hat as she glanced in his
direction and Miss Miller thanked him coldly for his courtesy.

Immediately after, the Guide turned abruptly to address Jane but looked
keenly at Nita. The girl failed to notice the teacher, however, for she
was leaning out of the surrey looking behind where the young fellow
still stood waving his hat.

"Zan, stop at once! Nita's lost something! What was it, Nita--I'll help
you find it?" said Miss Miller.

"Why--nothing! I didn't lose anything," replied the girl, flushing the
moment she realised that she had been caught.

"Oh, I thought you were looking along the road for something you had
dropped. Well, drive on, Zan, it's all right!" said the Guide.

"I might have dropped my hat and had a chance to get out and see Jack
Everton," thought Nita regretfully.

The rest of the drive over the woodland road was silent, but the girls
soon began chattering again, at sight of interesting things in meadows.

After leaving the woodland, Zan let the horse climb up a gradual
ascent, taking his time to do so. The road doubled many times before
reaching the top. This was to make the ascent easier, Miss Miller
explained. At the summit the girls jumped out and admired the view. Zan
unhooked the loose check-rein and let the horse graze for a time.

"We can see Baldy right across the valley--see?" said Zan, pointing in
the direction of the knoll.

"Then this must be the mountain we saw yesterday," said Jane.

"It is--it used to be called Pine Tree Hill by the farmers hereabouts,
but we shortened it to Pine Nob. It gets the name on account of all the
fine pines covering its sides," exclaimed Zan.

"But not a berry to be seen!" remarked Hilda.

"And not a snake!" laughed Miss Miller, looking at Elena.

After the Band had roamed about all they wished to, Miss Miller, who
had been carefully examining the place, said, "Wouldn't this make a
delightful spot for a night-camp when we begin star-gazing?"

"Oh, yes! And there is a small ravine where the spring of fresh water
is!" added Zan eagerly.

"Is there! That was the only drawback as far as I knew--now that is
removed," replied the Guide.

"Let's come as soon as we can," urged Jane.

"Very well. Suppose we say the first clear night after to-night!"
suggested the Guide.

Returning, Zan chose a different road home. At the foot of Pine Nob
Cheokee took the road past the Forks and went on the road that ran in
front of the Hamilton place. So near were they that the barking of many
dogs could be heard. Zan explained that Mr. Hamilton had thorough-bred
dogs that he showed at exhibitions or sold for fabulous prices to
dog-fanciers.

When the girls drove in at the farm-gate Bill was nowhere in sight, so
they backed the carriage into the shed and unharnessed the horse alone.

The greater part of the afternoon had been spent in driving and there
was just time for a bath, before supper had to be started.

It took but a few minutes to get out of camp clothes and slide into
union suits. It had become quite the natural thing to see each other in
the union suits and no further thought was given to it.

The girls were eager to try their courage again and soon were splashing
and shouting, Zan suggesting ways and means of keeping afloat, or
trying a stroke. Suddenly, Miss Miller stood up in the water near the
willow and exclaimed, "Oh, what a cute puppy!"

The girls bobbed up quickly and looked in the direction of the Guide's
glance. There sat a half-grown collie pup on the edge of the Bluff
looking knowingly down at the bathers.

"Oh, you little darling! Come here!" called Zan, snapping her fingers
at the pup.

The doggy wagged his tail violently and jumped up and down, giving
funny little barks.

"Isn't he too cunning for anything!" said Elena.

"Come down here--here, doggy, doggy!" coaxed Jane.

The girls stood close together on the edge of the water when the pup
suddenly decided to run down to them. He bounded over the grass by the
pool and before any one could follow his antics, he jumped in the pool
among them.

The girls gave little shrieks and the pup thought it was a signal for
play. He immediately caught hold of Zan's suit where it ended about the
knee. His teeth felt like tiny steel pins as he clenched the edge of
the material, and Zan might have frightened him off had he not upset
her into the water. This done, he paddled about and heard the girls
clapping madly at the prank. He thought this meant that they wanted
some fun too, so he raced to their side and jumped about in the shallow
pool, making them squeal and hug each other. The puppy would not be
balked of his fun, however, so he tried to get a hold on their fitted
suits.

Wild screams and laughter resulted, and suddenly, while the Guide stood
under the willow holding her side breathlessly, the entire group,
victims and dog, rolled over into the pool.

Of course, there was a mad scene of splashing, sputtering and crying
out for help, before either of the girls could rise. The puppy stood on
the edge of the bank wagging his tail, his head on one side with black
eyes winking at his prey, and his tongue lolling from one side of his
wide-open mouth.

When the submerged four could recover a normal state of breathing
again, the puppy bent down and began lapping water in as unconcerned a
manner as a puppy can assume.

"I wonder if he can swim?" called Zan, who still stood at a safe
distance where the dog had ducked her.

"Most likely; he ought to teach the girls the correct method," replied
Miss Miller.

Zan whistled and threw a stick down stream to tempt the dog, but he
merely watched it float away, and then laid down in the sun to dry.

All the coaxing and chirruping had no effect on the sleepy pup, so the
girls ceased their wiles and tried to swim in good style.

During supper, the puppy cried for something to eat, and a bowl of
oatmeal left from breakfast, and some warm milk was given him.

"I wonder where he could have come from?" said Elena.

Bill passed by the Bluff on his way to the barn to feed Cheokee, and he
said he thought the puppy belonged to Hamilton. A light dawned in Zan's
eyes at that.

"Miss Miller, I bet anything, the puppy followed us when we drove past
the place. We wouldn't have noticed him, you know, and he, most likely,
kept far enough behind so that we didn't see him when we got out.
Collie dogs have a wonderful scent, and he could find his way after us
even if we were out of sight."

"That seems plausible. Then he must go back home. We will walk over in
the morning, and have Bill telephone from the house that the dog is
safe."

Bill consented to do this, and the girls hurried supper and did the
dishes, so that they could enjoy a romp with the dog.

"I wish to goodness we could keep him!" sighed Zan, watching the pup
drag Elena's shoe about.

"We could call him Wickee, couldn't we?" suggested Jane.

"Yes, if we owned him. But pedigreed pups like this one cost too much
for our Band to buy, and Hamilton raises all his dogs for money, so
it's good-night to _that_ dream!" said Zan.

"Sorry, Zan, to heap trouble on your head; regret for the impossibility
of owning the pup and accumulating marks against your record for
slang!" hinted the Guide.

"Oh, well, I don't just care a fig! there now! If I only had a dog
like this Wickee, I wouldn't say another slang-word in my whole life,
really! But what's the use of caring when you haven't got a pet as cute
as this one!" Zan grumbled and pouted until she was on the verge of
tears. Miss Miller had a hard time to keep a straight face.

"If Mr. Hamilton could only see and hear you now, he would rather lose
his dollars than disappoint you," laughed Elena.

Bill's face showed in the dark of the woods just then, and the girls
halted their play to ask what was said about the pup.

"Mr. Hamilton swore at first, saying he never could keep this pup home.
He was always getting lost. Then he said, "Bill, I promised the doctor
a pup of the next good strain we raised here, didn't I, in return for
saving the prize collie's life last year. S'posing I give that pup to
the girl--if she wants him, and my debt will be paid!"

"I says t' him, Miss Zan will be much obleeged, I'm sure."

"He says, 'All right, tell her the deal is closed--the dog's hers.'"

Bill looked blinkingly at Zan and Miss Miller, and Zan gave a shout as
she fell down on the grass and threw her arms about Wickee. So, that's
the manner of Wickee joining the camp.




CHAPTER TEN

THE LETTER THAT SAVED NITA


Soon after breakfast on Saturday morning, Bill signalled for Miss
Miller's attention. She went to the edge of the Bluff and he called up
through a paper megaphone (a device of the Guide's) that the butcher
wagon was waiting in front of his house.

"Come and help me select the meat, girls," said Miss Miller, as she
ran to the cupboard for a platter. Assuring herself that she had her
pocketbook, the Guide hurried down the slope, followed by the girls
laughing at the idea of six people going to select one piece of meat!

The butcher was a good-natured man eager to please a good customer. He
had heard with dismay, that the doctor's family was going to spend the
summer at the seashore, for the doctor always bought plenty of meat and
paid cash for it, too. As many of his customers bought meat in exchange
for produce, or made the man wait until they could sell farm truck
before paying him, he felt a great relief when Bill told him of the
party coming to camp at the farm.

"Good morning, Mr. Balsh. Have you any good shin-meat for soup?" asked
Miss Miller, having been introduced by Mrs. Sherwood.

"No shin, ma'am, to-day, but I've got a good piece of flank--or a chunk
of round. How will that do?" he asked anxiously.

The girls tittered at the queer terms for meat, and Miss Miller
examined the flank carefully. Then, turning to the round, she asked,
"How much is this a pound?"

"Twenty-two, ma'as! Same as city markets without addin' cost of haulin'
or express."

"Oh, but you ought to charge extra for any cost you have to bear. Your
buyers would be willing to share any extra expense," said Miss Miller.

"Yah! I knows it, but, you see, it's just this way! A new butcher
starts up in town and calls upon all my customers what I have served
for years. He tells them what he kin sell meat for, an' they says to
me, 'Mr. Balsh, eider you gives us the same price, or we don't buy!'
What should I do, ma'am?"

"That's true!" sighed Miss Miller. "Unfair competition is the ruination
of all business. Most likely his quality of meat was not to be compared
to yours!"

"You're a smart womans, ma'am! That's just what it tis. His meat, what
he would sell my customers, what trust me for years, phew! Ma'am,
excuse me, but I must tell you--it tis all bad!"

The girls had to laugh at the disgusted face on the butcher. "But I
trust he didn't get any of your people from you?" added Miss Miller.

"Some few--what never paid me on time, anyways. The odders all stuck!
But I tells you, I had to come down with my good meat, to his prices
for bad meat!" and the poor man sighed loudly as he folded his fat arms
over his rubicund form.

The round steak spread out for inspection was not what the Guide
wanted. She wanted a sirloin. "I carry a few for my fancy customers.
Folks like Mrs. Sherwood's always buys round."

A fine cut was chosen, Miss Miller showing the girls why she took a
steak that had very fine veinings of fat all through it. The colour was
a fresh red and a goodly-sized tenderloin lay along the long narrow
bone.

The sirloin was twenty-six cents a pound; the girls all stared when
they heard that the steak--for one dinner--would cost almost a dollar
of their camp fund.

Miss Miller selected two pounds of flank-beef and the butcher gave her
a quantity of bones for nothing. The beef cost sixteen cents a pound.
She pointed out the difference between top-round, flank, and shin meat,
for soup. The girls had learned more in one morning about the meat they
ate than they ever thought of knowing all their lives.

"If we planned to make 'beef roll' which is very nice cut cold, or with
brown gravy, we would use a piece of flank. The shin meat makes the
most nourishing soup, I think. I believe some folks say the flavour of
flank-beef is too strong to be good, but I will leave you to judge of
the quality when you taste it."

"I have a little chunk of top-round here, ma'am, that I want to get
rid of. I am most through with my route for to-day an' will sell this
cheap."

The butcher picked up a small piece of beef and weighed it. "It's two
and a half pounds--you can have it for forty cents, ma'am."

"That is a bargain--I'll take it," said Miss Miller.

The meat was given to different girls and the wagon continued down the
road, while the Band returned to the Bluff, Miss Miller carrying a
large enamelled pot Mrs. Sherwood gave her as they passed the back-door.

"How did the pot happen to be down at Sherwoods'?" asked Zan
wonderingly.

"Mrs. Sherwood says she generally uses it for boiling jelly to send
to your mother. It is large and doesn't scorch as easily as a tin or
copper kettle."

At camp the Guide placed the purse in her tent and then called Hilda
to come to the fire-place with her. "You saw me build a fire the other
day, so I want you to do it now. I will have to hunt for a stronger
cross-stick to hold the soup-pot. When water and all this meat is in,
it will be heavy for the small stick we are now using."

In a short time, Miss Miller came back to the Bluff with a satisfactory
piece of wood in her hand. The girls were watching Hilda trying to
light the fire without success.

After a short examination of the cause, the Guide said, "You haven't
cleaned out the ashes from this morning."

"But you left your ashes in the other day," said Hilda.

"Ah, but that was when we first began our fire-pit. A small quantity of
ashes always makes a better heater. But too much of anything is worse
than none!"

As soon as some of the ashes had been removed and a new trial made of
lighting the dry wild-wood material, it succeeded.

Elena was told to wash the bones and soup meat carefully by the willow
bank, and Nita was sent to pare the vegetables the Guide placed before
her. Jane and Zan were told to go to the house with the sirloin steak
to keep it on the ice in the pantry.

"We must either have Bill move that ice-chest over here or we must
build one for daily use," said Miss Miller, as she thought of the
convenience it would be to have a larder at hand.

"What's the use carrying the meat there now? While you and the other
girls are preparing the soup and things, Jan and I can hook Cheokee to
the traces and use him to haul the ice-chest over here. We can tilt it
over onto the wheels of the express wagon and tie it securely. When we
get to Bill's, his plough horse can haul it up instead of Cheokee."

"Splendid! Zan, I almost wish I could rub out those marks for slang,
and give you a merit instead, for all of your helpful ideas," said Miss
Miller.

"That reminds me--we haven't held our daily Council yet. When we do, I
have a proposition to make," said Zan, smiling as she ran off through
the woods.

The ice-chest proved a welcome addition to the camp furniture, for most
of the food could be kept inside and keep marauding ants and flies away
from it.

Miss Miller placed the bones, soup-meat and the chunk of flank and
top-round in the big pot, with vegetables cut in small pieces, salt and
pepper, and a gallon and a half of water, thrown in last. The pot was
filled to the brim until it began to boil slowly. Then, a slow fire was
kept going under the pot until the soup was done--about four hours'
time.

The top-round was left in for an hour, and when the Guide took it
carefully out of the pot, it was half-cooked through.

"What are you going to do with it--it's only half done?" said Zan.

"We're going to have it for dinner, and save the steak for to-morrow.
Now, you all watch and see how I make a juicy pot-roast of this beef."

That noon the Band had the beef, string beans, lettuce and rhubarb. A
dinner fit for a prince--so they said.

At the Council that day Zan made her proposition. "Miss Miller
suggested that we each receive a demerit for slang. Now, I firmly
believe that something should be given to offset those marks, so I
propose that for every helpful idea given the Band, we be permitted to
erase a demerit, or be given a merit to balance the final reckoning!"

The Guide's eyes twinkled at the plan, for she saw the zeal the girls
were feeling in the work. She thoroughly approved Zan's suggestion, as
it would prove an incentive to sharpen their wits as well as refrain
from slang talking.

As the motion was carried unanimously it was entered in the Tally Book
as one of the rules of the camp.

At the adjournment of the Council some one suggested that they all walk
over to Hamilton's and thank the owner for presenting Wickee to them.

"Then we won't get back in time to swim!" objected Nita.

"Why not hitch up Cheokee and drive over?" said Zan.

"Better still, let me drive Cheokee over and you girls walk the
required distance in the hour and win a _coup_; on the return we can
drive and get back in time for a swim, too!" advised the Guide.

"Fine! That's a go!" cried Jane eagerly.

Every one approved so the hikers were soon on the way to winning
another _coup_ for walking. Being fresh, eager, and the road shady
and hard, the walk was a delight, except to Nita, who, on account of
wearing French-heeled shoes, had to give up for that time and ride
the last two miles in the surrey. Miss Miller permitted Cherokee to
walk slowly behind the girls and the others arrived at Hamilton's farm
without realising the distance walked.

Mr. Hamilton escorted the girls over the place, showing the kennels and
many valuable dogs. Then Mrs. Hamilton had them sit on the verandah
while she served them with home-made ice-cream.

On the drive back to camp, Jane was learning how to guide the horse and
Zan sat beside her. Miss Miller sat in the back seat so Zan had to turn
to look at her as she said, "Miss Miller, I need a merit badly! I have
a suggestion for the benefit of the whole camp!"

The other paid attention and Jane pulled up the reins so unexpectedly
that Cheokee thought he was meant to stop, so he halted in the middle
of the road. No one noticed it then.

"We have oodles of ice at the farm and we all love ice-cream, so I
suggest that we send home and borrow our four-quart freezer!"

While the girls "ahed" and "ummed," Miss Miller laughed heartily. "You
subtract a mark with a suggestion and add one with a slang word!" said
she.

"Why, how!" frowned Zan.

"Didn't you realise it? Then it shows how unconsciously this habit has
taken root. You said just now, 'oodles of ice.'"

"But that isn't slang! That's English!" remonstrated Zan.

"You'll not find it in any authorised dictionary."

"Well, I've heard the boys use that term so many times that I was sure
it was English," sighed Zan.

"But, remember, most of the slang you have acquired has been the result
of hearing it from your brothers. So, I would not quote them as
critics of English," laughingly said the Guide.

"Well, is the suggestion approved by all?" returned Zan.

"Yes, indeed, that goes without saying!" returned the girls unanimously.

"Then we get ice-cream hereafter, but I miss my merit!" laughed Zan,
turning about and chirping to Cheokee to wake up.

The swimming that afternoon was fine, as the sun had neared Pine Tree
Knob before the girls were ready. Wickee had been impatiently awaiting
their appearance and the moment one of them came from the tent, the
collie jumped about and yelped with glee. He accompanied the Band to
the pool and watched them go in, but he sat on the grass and would not
be persuaded to bathe.

"He's _got_ to come in--we need him to give us lessons," cried Elena,
starting for the dog. But Wickee must have understood, for he sprang in
before any one could approach him.

He swam about enjoying the bath thoroughly and when he had circled the
pool several times, he came near Zan and wanted to play. He snapped
at her hair as it floated on the water, and tagging hard, ducked her
under, so that she had to catch hold of his leg to make him let go.

Then, seeing Hilda and Elena trying to swim a few yards, Wickee caught
hold of a floating stick of wood and carried it to Elena. The stick
caught in her hair and she, too, went under.

Wickee then tried to catch Hilda's sleeve, but she was too quick for
him, and was on her feet before he could get hold of her.

After an hour of fun, Miss Miller warned the girls of the time, and
went toward her tent. After a few more plunges, the girls came out;
Wickee shook himself and flopped down on the warm rock to dry.

At supper, Miss Miller said, "To-morrow is Sunday. We will observe the
day in the way we have been taught. If any one feels it is not right to
take a little plunge in the pool, or go for a walk, or anything we do
daily, let that one follow her own conscience. I, for one, will take
my usual bath, and read in the morning. After dinner, I will join any
one who wishes to go for a short walk. After supper I expect to sit and
enjoy the sunset and the twilight."

"We will do the same, Miss Miller," said the girls, so the question of
the Sabbath was quietly decided once for all.

The girls all spent the Sabbath morning writing letters home, and to
friends. Zan's letter was composed mostly of exclamations of delight
over camping and requests for her mother to send various articles to
the camp before she left for the beach. The ice-cream freezer was
mentioned not less than four times throughout the letter, so you
can see that Zan never refused a treat of ice-cream if she had an
opportunity to accept any.

Monday morning the postman left several letters in the mail-box in
front of Sherwoods' house. Zan saw him going down the Bridge road and
called to Miss Miller, "I'll run down and see if he left any mail for
us!" And was off before any one could wink.

Coming back to camp, she displayed a number of letters, among them, one
for Miss Miller from her father, and another for Nita, post-marked at
the adjoining post-office.

"Who do you know down around here?" queried Zan, looking at the writing.

"None of your business--give it to me!" snapped Nita, angrily, grabbing
the letter from Zan's hand.

"Pooh! I should worry!" sneered Zan, also angry. "The writing looks
just like Bob's did when he was ten years old! I'd find some one who
could write a decent hand!"

Zan was not aware of the fact that she had touched upon a tender
subject between Nita and Miss Miller, and Nita did not dare answer
while the Guide stood there; but Miss Miller said to Zan, "It really is
too bad that you are piling up bad marks on your page! That slang just
used ought to have ten marks given you." The tone in which sentence was
pronounced was worse for Zan to bear than all the marks ever thought of.

Miss Miller walked away to her tent, there to read her letter in peace,
but Zan felt heartily ashamed of her anger and was willing to ask
pardon. Nita, however, had gone up the path through the ravine. Be it
known that she had her letter in her middy blouse, however.

In the privacy of her tent, Miss Miller opened the letter which was a
reply to the one she had sent the doctor. It was as follows:


  "My dear Miss Miller:

I read with deep concern the information you sent I called upon
Mrs. Brampton immediately and had a long talk with her about Nita's
disease--for it is a disease finding its birth in the mental realm.
Mrs. Brampton cried of course, and then told me of a great deal of the
worry she has had during the last two years. I have been called in now
and then to prescribe for Mrs. Brampton or Nita, while Mr. Brampton has
his own doctor downtown whenever he thinks he needs medical advice.
Nita has not been ill in the past two years, and Mrs. Brampton has only
called upon me for minor ailments, so I have not had occasion to have
any serious talks with Nita's mother about the girl's well-being. I
heard, with regret, that she had developed a dangerous habit of secrecy
from her mother and friends. She dislikes to take part in anything
that calls for physical exercise, deep thinking, or help for others.
She is continually making excuses for shortcomings and has recently
been misrepresenting truth to her mother as the easiest way to account
for her time and actions. I think that I would have separated my girl
from such companionship had I known the evil to be guarded against.
As it is, I wonder if it is best for all at camp to continue having
an influence such as Nita creates, about you. It will be your duty
to decide; all I can do now is to assist in any way you may need my
services.

"One extenuating reason for the girl's behaviour, I think we ought to
take into consideration. Her mother told me of Nita's early years.
The child was ushered into this world under unfavourable conditions.
Mrs. Brampton is a very delicate woman and the baby had no strength
with which to start the battle of life. All prepared foods disagreed
with the stomach and the frail little child was merely a skeleton
until after a year's time. It then became noticeable that the child
was gaining slowly in health, strength and general behaviour. From the
second year on, Nita grew much the same as other children, but always
seemed two years behind the average normal child.

"At ten years, when I first was called to diagnose an illness of the
girl's, I was surprised to find how matured she was in her ways and
speech--all of which showed me that her _thoughts_ were too mature
for her age. Instead of a teasing, fun-loving child I found a quiet,
indolent-loving young lady who constantly ate candy and read books five
years in advance of her age. I told her mother than, that Nita needed
tom-boy companions to interest her in physical development, and more
bread and butter, with possibly a bit of jam spread on it now and then,
instead of sweets, highly-seasoned salads and desserts, and the wine
that Mr. Brampton always has with dinner. He has always been amused to
see his little daughter sip from his glass and Mrs. Brampton told me
that she could see no harm in having a child accustomed to wine, just
the same as my children are accustomed to water at our table. In fact,
she said that she pitied children who were never permitted to taste
drinks and then went all to pieces when they grew up and went out into
the world to be tempted with alcohol and tobacco.

"I found that she was not capable of discerning facts from fancy, so I
did not waste more time trying to explain then; but I told my daughter
to try and wean the girl from undesirable habits, and I often invited
Nita to visit at our home. Perhaps, this was a mistake. It remains to
be seen whether Zan has enough character and self-control to come out
of contamination without a scar."

At this point of the long letter, Miss Miller looked out of the
tent-opening and smiled, murmuring, "I think any child that sensible
man trains can associate with and not become contaminated by evils."

Miss Miller continued reading the enlightening lines after a few
moments' thought.

"Two years after my first introduction to Nita's family I was called
again to examine the girl. That was when she was twelve. I found
that Mrs. Brampton failed to follow my directions regarding food and
sleep. She said it was such a nuisance to argue with Mr. Brampton and
Nita over the wine and viands that would give a high-liver chronic
indigestion, to say nothing of a delicate child! She also said that
she remonstrated with Nita about sitting up late reading stories and
always nibbling candy. But Nita had a will of her own! And the past
year the dear child had been invited to such nice parties that she (the
mother) was glad to have her meet more friends of her own or a much
higher class, consequently health was sacrificed to social ambition.
She explained at the time, what a graceful dancer Nita was and how
people loved to have her attend evening dances and exhibit her gift for
their pleasure. There was no use trying to disguise the truth which was
self-evident: Mrs. Brampton was a foolish proud mother to whom flattery
of anything her child did was incense at her own altar. Instead of the
girl being tucked into flannelette nighties with feet so she could kick
all night in bed without cold from exposure, she was flossed up in
organdy and tulle ruffles with white silk stockings and shoes and shown
off at dances--all for vain-glory.

"The vicious training--I mean bad, senseless, evil influence, by that
word vicious--of her life had actually developed a backward delicate
organism into matured girl-hood three years in advance of what is
normal.

"I watched with deep interest this product of senseless motherhood for
I was eager to help others by comparison with the results of my own
endeavours. I often visited, without being called upon, to direct and
help the girl to a better status of health and aspiration. I do not
think I succeeded very well. I had the parents' foolishness to battle
again. Perhaps I laid the seed of a higher life which will grow and bud
during your care this summer, while her parents are out of reach. It is
to be hoped for. This makes it a matter of deepest thought before she
is sent back home without further trial. But at the same time others
are to be considered.

"I believe the habit of taking a tiny drink of wine at dinner has
resulted, during the last two years, in chronic intermittent heart-beat
and accelerated circulation. This will, or has, induced inflammability
of the brain which, in turn, has acted upon organs supposed to be
dormant for years to come. The trashy novels Nita has been permitted to
read have also caused high-tension thoughts foreign to all nature. Even
an adult of experience and self-control is not benefited physically or
mentally by reading or watching a play, based on immoral emotions, or
the suggestions of them.

"Now the question confronts us--you and me--has the atmosphere hitherto
surrounding the girl been so subtle in its evil influence that it is
past coping with? Or can we, by taking deep thought of ways and means,
convert this individual who is on a steep descent toward licentious
living and later, chronic invalidism, to be eventually claimed by
some frightful disease as payment in full for ungodly habits, into a
physical success--one who desires clean living, simple loving, and
pure thinking!"

With the last inspiring paragraph the letter ended, only a short phrase
of "Yours earnestly," and the signature.

Miss Miller sat for a long time pondering the letter, and read several
parts of it again. Then she rose with a sigh of responsibility and
locked the communication in her bag.

"Where did Nita go?" asked the Guide, joining the girls.

"Up the ravine," replied Jane.

"Well, the day is clear and I think we can plan to camp out to-night.
It will be our first lesson in star-gazing, too!" laughed Miss Miller,
hiding her concern over Nita's absence.

"What are we going to do this morning--and this afternoon, too?" asked
Zan.

"I believe we will need some vegetables from the garden, and I thought
we might learn how to bake cake for dessert."

"Goody! That will be fun! Shall we divide up?" said Hilda.

"No, a short walk to the garden will be good for all; then we can all
take a hand in baking the cake."

"I wonder why Nita doesn't want to take part in our fun," ventured
Jane, who was being disillusioned very rapidly regarding her admiration
for the graceful pretty miss.

"She has never had an opportunity to act as freely and in the
open as you have, perhaps. Her home life has cooped her with its
conventionalities until she feels lost in this rural life. We must be
patient with her and try, by example, to show how undesirable are the
frothy perishable things of social butterflies," said Miss Miller.

Nita returned before the Band was quite ready to leave camp for the
garden. Her efforts to be agreeable made the girls believe that she was
sorry for her ill-humor and would be pleasant thereafter. The Guide
saw beneath the veneer of smiles and wondered if the letter dated
from the adjoining post-office had anything to do with Nita's present
good-nature.

The vegetables selected, Miss Miller said, "Our cake will have to
be baked in the oven at the house. I think there will be all the
ingredients necessary in the pantry. Zan can show us where the tins are
kept, for I thought a jelly cake would be the best to make to-day."

"Oh, yes. I love layer cake!" cried Elena.

The rest signified their anticipation of the cake in various ways, and
by the time the house was reached every one was sure the cake would be
delicious.

"Oh, pooh! I'm so hot after that garden work! Let's sit under the tree
and cool off," suggested Hilda.

"You didn't complain of heat while we were working in the garden," said
Miss Miller.

"Just because I didn't feel it then! We were having such fun with the
vegetables that I never thought of it!"

"No, isn't it queer? I never feel hot when I am playing tennis or
rowing on the lake--but afterwards--my!"

"Then you lead me to believe that when your thought is filled with
pleasurable pursuits, such as gardening, tennis, or rowing, the heat
is never noticed--it is afterwards, when you are mentally seeking for
something to divert your thoughts against, that the suggestion reaches
your body, 'My, but I am warm!'"

The girls expressed their interest in individual ways, Hilda finally
saying, "Miss Miller, you certainly do a heap of _thinking_! I never
saw anybody who could take us up so quick on anything that could be
turned into a lesson!"

"I do not wish you to feel that I am always seeking for a suitable
reason to teach a lesson, but some of these opportunities you offer me
are too good to lose track of," said the Guide, anxiously looking at
each girl.

"Oh, don't worry! We don't mind a bit! In fact, I thoroughly enjoy your
ideas--they correspond so exactly with Dad's," replied Zan, getting up
from the grass where she had thrown herself.

"Where're you going, Zan?" asked Nita.

"Kitchen! I'm going to get interested and forget how warm the sun tried
to fool me into believing!"

The others laughed but got up from the grass and followed Zan.

"Here's the tins, and there's the baking-powder! Maybe it isn't
good--it's been here all winter!" said Zan.

Miss Miller examined the can. "It's the best powder made, and if
the pantry is dry all winter and spring, there will be no loss of
properties in the powder. It pays to use the best products we can get;
by that I do not mean the most expensive, for often one pays more for
advertised products that are really inferior than for one which is pure
but not so costly in marketing the brand."

"Well, you brought eggs, milk, and butter--what else do we need for the
cake?" said Nita.

"Flour--I know there is some here, for I left it the first morning we
ate here," replied Miss Miller, going to the cupboard.

"And the jelly--Zan can get that," continued the Guide.

Nita was ordered to measure out a cupful of sugar, Elena to grease the
jelly tins very thoroughly and spread a small piece of oiled paper on
the bottom of each pan. Hilda was started beating two eggs, and Jane
rubbing a lump of butter well into the sugar. Nita, having finished her
measuring, was called upon to assist the Guide in building a fire in
the stove.

Miss Miller reached the conclusion that by having Nita help her more
she would keep her in closer personal association with her and this
perhaps might benefit the girl.

"First you crumple some paper up loosely and place it in the
fire-pit," said Miss Miller, showing Nita how to go about it. "Next,
lay some fine kindlings this way and that--if you threw them upon the
paper any way they may burn and again they may not; if you build them
up so there is a liberal air-space for the smoke and fire to rise
toward the chimney, the wood will always take fire readily. Now, the
kindlings just right, you can lay a few heavy pieces of split wood on
top. That's right, so now we'll light the paper from _underneath_!
Never from the open lid on top."

The other girls left their tasks and watched the lesson in
fire-building. Nita said, "Why not--I should think the easiest way
would be to drop a match down to the paper while you have the stove-lid
off!"

Miss Miller felt well repaid for her trouble by seeing Nita sincerely
interested.

"First, the smoke rises and may cause one unpleasant choking or
watering eyes. Then, too, the open lid prevents the draft that
circulates from chimney down the back of the stove and underneath where
ashes accumulate and up against the fire-pit to force a fire higher. If
you lean over I will show you the back-damper."

Miss Miller took off the last back lid on the top of the stove and
showed the girls a closed damper. By pushing in a small key just over
the oven which the girls had never noticed on a stove before, she
demonstrated how the little door dropped back and left the current of
air and smoke to escape from the fire and rise through the chimney.
She also pointed out the wide mouth at the back of the stove that
permitted the air from the chimney to go down and find its way into the
ash-pit directly under the fire.

"If your ash-pit is filled with ashes the fire never will force any
heat into the oven, of top-lids. It may burn slowly, but not until the
ashes are removed can you look for any right result in your stove!
Lazy house-keepers dislike to take out ashes and keep on heaping coal
on top of their fire; that only burns out the enduring qualities in
your stove top. A fire that barely reached to the top of the fire-pit
is always best, and to keep it at that height you must keep the ashes
that are always forming under the fire well raked down until you see
a red reflection at the under side of the grate. If you do not quite
understand, I can show you later, when the cake is in the oven."

Nita then knelt down before the fire-pit and carefully placed a burning
match under the paper. It flared up and in a few seconds, they all
heard wood crackling. But smoke backed out of the lids and seemed to be
ready to burst the stove-pipe.

"Oh, Miss Miller, what's wrong?" cried Zan, anxiously.

Miss Miller smiled and said, "After my lesson, can't one of you
discover the trouble?"

The girls coughed and rubbed their eyes but no one had an idea what
to do. Smoke kept pouring forth while they looked about for some clue
to the knowledge which the Guide seemed to keep to herself. Finally,
they had to give up, and she immediately took hold of a key, similar
to the oven damper, that was seen in the stove-pipe, and turned it up
vertically. Immediately the smoke was released into the chimney, it
stopped coming from the stove.

"Well! what a simple thing to do!" exclaimed Zan.

"Now, if you run out and look up you will see smoke pouring from the
kitchen chimney," said the Guide.

"We'll take your word for it--we're anxious to bake the cake," laughed
Elena.

More wood was placed on the fire and a few minutes after Miss Miller
poured a small quantity of coal on the wood.

"Now it will burn without our watching, and we can go back to the
cake. Hilda, measure two teaspoonfuls of baking powder into two cups
of sifted flour. Zan, take the spermaceti from the jelly. Wash it off
carefully and leave it in the closet to use for waxing our irons when
we do our laundry."

"I've often wondered what this thing was on top of the jelly and
preserves," said Zan, examining the hardened cake.

"What is that put on for?" asked Elena, while the others watched Zan
remove it.

"It keeps the jelly or other preserves from the air. In case of canned
or preserved things, air causes fermentation. With jelly, tiny flies
settle and eat the top, finally making it sour and unfit to use. This
wax is poured on top of the jar while it is in a melted condition;
it soon hardens and forms a close sealed top. It does not injure the
quality of jelly or wax, so it is waste to throw away the wax when it
is serviceable in other ways."

Zan had removed the spermaceti while the Guide spoke, and stood
awaiting further orders. "Muzzer always put some flavour in our
cakes--we all like vanilla," said she.

"It would be better to eat if we had any, but I forgot to have any
extracts sent here," said Miss Miller.

"I'll look in the cupboard, maybe there will be some left over from
last year," Zan hastened to say, and ran over to investigate. "Yes,
here's half a bottle!"

The flavouring extract was added after eggs and a cup of milk had
been stirred together, and, lastly, the flour with powder was mixed
in. The batter resulting was just a bit thicker than a self-spreading
concoction would be. Miss Miller poured it out into the three pans and
the girls spread it over the bottom.

"I can judge the right heat in an oven by thrusting in my hand, but
many housekeepers use a thermometer to ascertain the right temperature
for baking," said Miss Miller, trying the oven as she spoke.

In a moment she added, "Bring the tins--the oven's ready!"

She opened the oven-door carefully a few times during the ten minutes
the cakes were baking, while the girls hung over her shoulders and
sniffed delightedly. Then the tins were taken out and the cakes removed
to cool before spreading the jelly over each layer. When one layer was
placed on top of the other, the cake presented a most tempting look.

"We won't bother to ice this one, as we ought to make a corn-starch
pudding for dinner while the stove is hot. And remember, girls, these
things all go to help win a _coup_!" reminded Miss Miller.

While the girls stirred the ingredients for the simple pudding, the
Guide asked, "Do you know where starch comes from?"

They looked thoughtful for a time, then Zan said, "I think I have
heard, but I never took much notice of it."

"Well, starch is found in potatoes. Of course there are many starchy
products but potatoes form the principal supply. We find starch in
cereals--in rice, corn and sago. As you can see, the starch we used
just now is made of corn. If one uses cold water to dissolve starch, it
forms a paste, while hot water forms it into globules that are used to
stiffen linen and articles."

The pudding was finished and the Guide thought it a pity to waste such
fine heat. So it was decided to cook the vegetables for dinner and save
time at camp.

"Prepare to give me a merit!" cried Zan. "I propose that we eat dinner
on the lawn for a change!"

All assented, so Zan exclaimed, "Gee, that was easy!"

"Oh, Zan, Zan! You are absolutely hopeless!" sighed the Guide, while
all the girls laughed.

"_Now_ what's the matter?" wondered Zan.

"Don't you know? You win a merit one moment and deserve a demerit the
next! You are so accustomed to slang that you never realise when you
use it!" said Miss Miller.

"Dear me! I suppose I shall be tottering in old age before I ever can
outgrow the habit!" sighed Zan.

"Not tottering, Zan, but doddering!" laughed Jane.

While the girls prepared dinner on the lawn Miss Miller was engaged in
making an experiment. After dinner she invited the girls to the cool
porch to see what she had done.

"Before we return to camp, I am going to show you a very interesting
test in chemistry. One that will cause you to wonder how people who
know the action of this poison can deliberately imbibe it and consider
it worth all of their manhood, womanhood, and honour!"

On the porch the girls found that Miss Miller had visited the doctor's
little office where he kept his chemicals and apparatus. A few test
tubes and a glass retort stood on the table by the side of some medical
bottles.

"I have here a hard-boiled egg. I am not going to eat it, but use it
for the experiment that will show you what a mistake it is to put
anything in the human stomach that hinders the digestion as thoroughly
as alcohol does."

Miss Miller cracked the egg and crumbled a little of the hard white
into each of the two test-tubes.

"The powder in this bottle of Dr. Baker's is pepsin; it is made in the
stomach and digests what we eat," explained Miss Miller, as she shook
the bottle to loosen the powder that clung to the glass sides.

"Now, I am going to add a pinch of pepsin to the contents in these
tubes."

The pepsin was added to the egg and then the Guide filled each tube
half full with water.

Taking up two other bottles, she held them up to view and said, "One of
these contains an acid--hydrochloric acid, and the other holds an acid
called lactic. Both help to digest our food."

As she spoke she added a few drops of each to each test-tube and shook
the tubes thoroughly.

The girls had been watching everything with deep interest, and Miss
Miller continued, "If we leave these tubes alone, after a time the
pepsin and acids will digest the egg. Suppose, however, that I add one
teaspoonful of brandy or whiskey to one of the tubes and wait to see
what action takes place."

While speaking she took up a small vial of whiskey and poured a
teaspoonful of it into one tube. Both tubes were then corked up.

"Now, I want you girls to take a look at the temperature of these
tubes--they are the same as the temperature of a normal human stomach."

The girls obeyed and Miss Miller then placed the tubes inside a Thermos
bottle to keep them at an even temperature until the time required for
the digestion to take place.

Miss Miller took charge of the Thermos bottle while the girls took the
remainder of the dinner back to the Bluff.

The cake had been placed inside the cupboard and soon Wickee scented
it. He immediately took up his station directly in front of the doors
and started howling, with an intermittent sniff at the crack in the
cupboard door.

"Hey, there, Wick! Dogs' stomachs were not built for cake any more than
ours were made to hold alcohol! You can't have any of that cake until
we see what effect that stuff has on the egg!" called Zan.

The wise dog looked at his mistress out of the corners of his eyes, and
then, creeping away from the cupboard, he quietly left the Bluff and
stretched out upon the moss under the willow by the pool.

Miss Miller had gone to her tent to place the Thermos bottle in her
box and was just coming out when Nita came from her tent. A pink flush
over-spread her face when she saw the Guide so near, and a letter was
hastily hidden in the folds of her tunic.

"I was just going down to the mail-box with a note to mother,"
stuttered Nita, seeing that the letter was seen.

Miss Miller made no reply but walked to the edge of the Bluff with
the girl and stood there watching her hurry down the slope. At the
lilac bushes that grew near Sherwoods' kitchen door, she saw Nita
stop suddenly and look down at the ground. She stooped and picked
up a letter--whether it was the one she carried and had dropped
accidentally, or another one she had just found, the Guide could not
tell.

Nita looked up at the Bluff, saw Miss Miller still watching her, and
ran past the house, out of sight.




CHAPTER ELEVEN

STAR GAZING FROM PINE NOB


Half an hour later Nita returned to camp with a face swollen and eyes
red from weeping. She said nothing and the girls made no audible
comment on her appearance. Miss Miller felt sorry for the girl, for
it was apparent that she had experienced a heart-breaking period. But
the Guide could not imagine what had caused the trouble--was it that
good-for-nothing boy Everton or was Nita home-sick, or possibly, but
not probably, she was ashamed of her actions during the past few days.

The girls took an early swim and then packed their kits for the night
out. Each had a rubber blanket beside the camp-blanket, so these were
rolled about the other items selected for the night.

At the barn, Cheokee was soon hitched up and all the duffle-bags were
thrown under the seats. The girls jumped in while Zan fastened the
traces and told Wickee he had to run behind, or alongside the surrey.

Pine Nob was high enough to enable one to see for twenty miles around
the country, so a magnificent view could be obtained from its summit
on a clear day.

"Friends, I'm about to earn another merit. Observe that I do not intend
losing it immediately by using slang, so if I seem to run away suddenly
after delivering my idea, it is not because of any attraction at the
house but merely because I dare not remain where I may be tempted to
lose my reward!" laughed Zan, as the others climbed in the surrey.

Every one smiled and waited. "Since our arrival the camera brought by
Jane has remained asleep in the living-room. I go to rescue it from
idleness!"

With that Zan rushed off toward the house, while Cheokee was started
down the road to wait at the side-porch for his mistress. Zan earned
the merit that time and Elena made a note to enter the plan of a Camera
Club in the Tally Book.

The Band reached Pine Nob without mishap, but the sun was too low to
take any good pictures, so it was postponed for the morning.

The fire was made, supper enjoyed and Cheokee fed and left tide to a
strong tree for the night. Then Miss Miller advised all to get their
beds made before darkness overtook them.

"Oh, aren't we going to sleep on the ground?" asked Hilda.

"There isn't a thing in sight that we could possibly make a bed of!"
added Jane, looking about in amazement.

"Oh, yes there is! We are going to win a _coup_ by making beds from
wild-material only--and mighty good beds you will find them, too!" said
the Guide, smiling at their doubts.

"Twigs, and leaves, and moss?" questioned Nita, ironically.

"No, hardly that, but come with me and you will see," replied the Guide.

Cheokee was tethered to a stump near the camp-site and left to enjoy
his supper of oats. Miss Miller then took a trail that had not been
noticeable until attention was directed to it. This, she followed into
dense woods for half a mile or so, before coming to an aromatic grove.
Young trees, as well as half-grown spruce, grew in a thick wall under
old pines.

The Guide took her sharp sheath-knife from its case and started to cut
only those branches which showed young tender green tips. "While I cut
you girls can gather and make bundles of it."

"What for?" wondered Nita.

"You'll soon see, and then to-morrow you will say, 'How _can_ Mrs.
Sherwood sleep on feathers when these kind of beds are so cheap and
convenient!'"

"Oh, I know! It's for bedding!" cried Elena.

"I bet you've read some of White's books, haven't you?" said Zan, whose
brothers were in love with White's wood stories.

"Better not talk so much and work more--darkness will catch up before
our beds are made," warned the Guide, cutting without a pause.

Finally, every one was laden with branches, and soon the plateau
was reached and Miss Miller sought for a place where the ground was
comparatively level. Here she threw the greens.

"Now watch me weave a spring bed," said she, sitting down a sort her
branches, long, medium and short pieces.

She laid a row of long pieces of spruce with the tender soft green tips
directly away from her. This she made about four feet wide, with the
hard ends of the wood facing her. Upon this, lapping about two feet,
she laid another row--then another, until the bed was about six feet
long. She then placed the next layer on top but turned the ends the
opposite way, managing to run the hard wood in and under the first
layer. The second layer was laid of shorter branches. The third layer
was laid of still shorter ones, without much hard wood to cover. What
there was was run under the soft ends of the second layer so that not a
bid of wood could be seen or felt. Done, she stood up and admired the
bed.

"One of you girls throw yourself down--test it!"

Two or three followed the suggestion at once and each one sighed with
blissful anticipation of the night's rest.

"Isn't it soft!" cried Elena.

"And springy!" added Zan.

"I love that piney odour. I always loved balsam pillows!" said Jane,
sniffing at the green.

Hilda and Nita said nothing but they remained on the bed when the
others got up, thus showing what they thought of it.

Miss Miller assisted the girls in making their beds and when this was
done, they wanted to go to sleep.

"But we haven't seen a single star! I thought we were going to take a
test in star-gazing!" reminded the Guide.

"Oh, pshaw! What time is it? Isn't it most nine o'clock?" yawned Zan.

"No, it isn't! It's only seven-thirty!" laughed Miss Miller.

"Well, girls, let's go to it!" retorted Zan, where-upon she drew upon
her criminal head the laughter of the Band.

"There goes Zan's merit for camera hunting!" shouted Elena.

Zan good-naturedly accepted her doom and turned her face toward the sky
to find the first star.

"Hah! there's a star!" cried she, in a short time.

"Where, where? It can't be, it's too light to see stars!" said Elena,
who had hoped to be the first to succeed with the stars.

"Yes, I guess Zan is right; I see one, too, but, girls, you have to
concentrate on seeking, or you'll miss the faint twinkling," came from
the Guide.

After that the quiet was broken by cries, "There's one! I see another!"
and so on.

Finally Miss Miller, not wishing to tire the girls the first night of
star gazing, asked, "Who wants to go to bed--or who will choose to hunt
some planets?"

No one was ready to retire, it seemed, for the new game was too
interesting.

"For everyone who finds and names the correct planet and can tell some
facts about it, we will award a merit!" suggested Miss Miller.

For some time thereafter, not a sound could be heard except the snoring
of Wickee and the soft thud of Cheokee's hoofs as he wandered about the
tether.

"I see Venus--right there," cried Hilda, pointing.

The girls turned in the direction pointed out and Miss Miller said,
"Yes, that is Venus. Now, can you tell us anything about it?"

"Not much, I'm afraid. But I know that Venus and our earth are often
called sister planets, and at Christmas time it is often called the
Star of Bethlehem, as it shines so bright at that season. Then, too, I
believe it is the brightest star we can see with the naked eye," said
Hilda.

"Yes, that much is correct and you have won a merit, but for the
benefit of the others I will add that Venus' brightness is caused
by the clouds that surround it and reflect the sun's light just as
looking-glass would. Our clouds also reflect sunlight. Often we will
see masses of cloud banked up, so like snow-mountains and reflecting
such brightness that it dazzles us to gaze at them. The thick clouds
that surround Venus prevent us, on earth, from seeing any of its
continents or oceans that may be there. Sometimes, when a cloud thins
out we can peep through and catch a glimpse of the markings of this
beautiful planet."

When the Guide concluded, the girls turned their attention to the sky
again. Soon after Jane called, "I see a great big star--or rather
planet. I suppose it is Jupiter, as I know Jupiter always travels near
Venus."

"Yes, Jane is right, too. Now tell us all you know about him. You may
gossip freely, for we all like Jupiter and are eager to hear all there
is to know about him," said Miss Miller. "But I would correct your word
'travel,' for Jupiter does not travel with Venus; because it is so
brilliant we see it with more clarity of vision; Venus also being so
bright, we can pick these two out without difficulty. Sometimes the two
planets seem quite near each other, which might lead you to think they
travel in the same path."

"Well, I know this much correctly, anyway," said Jane. "Jupiter is
called the Giant Planet because it is the largest of the sun's family,
and is about 1300 times larger than the earth. Then, too, our earth
only has one moon while Jupiter has at least eight, and I don't know
how many more will be discovered in time."

Jane's manner of ending her description made the other girls laugh, but
Miss Miller said, "Did you ever look through a telescope at the sky
with its myriads of stars and planets?"

No one had, and the Guide said, "You've all missed a treat. When we go
back to the city we will make it one of our Band's treats to visit
some institution where there is a telescope. Elena, make a memorandum
on your sleeve to enter that in the Tally Book."

Elena giggled, for she was not aware that any one had seen her use her
cuff for a memo pad.

"Before we leave Jupiter, I think that I should add that Galileo--the
man who first used a telescope, you know--sought for Jupiter one night
and discovered the moons travelling around the great planet. Poor
Galileo tried to prove to his fellowmen that the earth was not the only
world but that it was a mere planet like many others to be seen. Folks
in those days believed that the earth was the centre of all things and
that the sun naturally travelled around it, as the moon and stars did,
also.

"They were so furious with Galileo for trying to tell them the truth
that they cast him in prison. When he showed them how the moons of
Jupiter travelled around it in an orbit, just as the moon went around
the earth, people began to think seriously of his statements. Some said
Galileo was a magician and had bewitched his telescope, or else had
bewitched his followers. After a time, however, they were forced to
admit that he was right, and since then every one reveres the name of
Galileo as that of a wonderful astronomer."

"I'd like to find Mars! Please don't any one else take it 'cause I was
born under that planet!" said Zan, during the period of silence that
followed Miss Miller's talk.

"Oh, no, Zan, you were not born under any planet! You surely have not
mentioned such foolish ideas to your father, have you?" cried Miss
Miller, surprised at the girl's statement.

"Why, no, I never gave it a thought, except what I heard read from a
New York paper. They print horoscopes and tell about governing planets
and signs of the zodiac. Is it foolish?"

"I should say it was! I know that a certain newspaper, so-called,
makes a circulation-booster of a section devoted to the study called
astrology, for silly folks to read and worry over. It seems all wrong
to me for any one to waste a thought on such trivial things when
profounder studies are right at hand awaiting our choice. It is true
that according to certain laws of gravitation and natural law, the
tides of the ocean are affected by the moon and planets, and farmers
plant crops at certain seasons of the zodiac, but to lay claim to
a star or planet having power or intelligence to control our lives
and future acts, is to become a necromancer. As you can read in the
first Book of the Bible, God made all things and he gave man all
dominion over all created things. Man, as His child, was given power
and intelligence like unto God, made in His image and likeness, and
nowhere in the Bible can you read where He refuted that government and
dominion! We still have power over stars and planets, and I, for one,
refuse to be domineered by a light, shining millions of miles away
from me. What kind of a guardian do you suppose that planet would
make?"

"Then why do folks call Mars the Planet of War, and say that it is
always a blood-red for a long time before a war or national strife
occurs?" asked Zan.

"No one really knows that Mars is more war-like in its office than
Venus or Jupiter. But I will not tell you more of Mars until Zan has
found him and told us what she knows," said Miss Miller.

"I see Mars--but Zan wants the privilege," said Nita, in a whisper.

"Oh, no, Nita; if you've found him first, you have prior claim. I'll go
on star-gazing and find something new!" said Zan.

"Well, it is that fiery planet just over the oak tree," directed Nita.
It was correct and she was led to speak of anything she knew of Mars.

"I don't know much beside what I heard in a theatre-play called the
Martians. They had a great map on the drop-curtain and I looked at the
markings that were supposed to be on the planet. Then I heard once that
Mars is a world like ours and has winter and summer. In winter it has
vast fields of ice and in summer rivers and dark places that may be
green hills and valleys. I guess it has inhabitants, too, but I don't
know what scientists think about that."

"Nita is right as far as facts go, but one important item was omitted.
Mars has practically no clouds, whereas the earth has an abundance of
them. Therefore, it must be continually fine weather on Mars, for
there cannot be any rain. Whether any people live to enjoy permanent
fair weather, we do not know, because Mars is such a distance away
that even with strongest telescopes we can only see different coloured
markings on the surface of the planet. I sometimes think that Mars
would have to have a wonderful irrigation system to succeed with
vegetation if it is inhabited. As it could have no rain, it would have
to conserve the melting snows of winter to water its valleys in summer."

"Hurrah! I've found my planet! You never will guess where it is
located!" laughed Zan.

Several attempts were made to locate it, but to no avail.

"Yet it is the most prominent and to our eyes the largest in the sky,"
continued Zan, aggravatingly.

Mercury, Saturn, Neptune, Uranus, and others were all mentioned, but
Zan shook her head at each guess. Finally the Guide said, "Give up."
Zan laughed with delight at having cornered the teacher.

"Ha! The moon! It is just rising above that pine!"

They all laughed, and Zan was told to tell what she knew.

"Well, I know that the moon isn't made of green cheese, although
there are some folks who still believe so. Then, too----" but Zan was
interrupted by the others rolling on the grass and laughing.

"Miss Miller, they should each have a demerit for disturbing the peace
like this," said Zan, in mock severity.

"They'll soon cancel it then, with a merit, just as you constantly
cancel your merits with _de_-merits for crime!" laughed Miss Miller.

As soon as the girls had quieted down again, Zan continued her harangue
in a lecture-tone.

"The moon has mountains known to us as moon-mountains. There are many
extinct volcanoes on its face that are supposed to have formed these
mountains. The moon is a satellite of the earth--it follows the earth
like the little lamb followed Mary. If our earth should take it into
its head to shoot off to a corner of the ether, a few million miles
away, the moon would just trail along after, and most likely cry all
the way for its mother earth."

The girls were delighted with Zan's lecture and Miss Muller had to pull
her face into control before she said, "We won't be able to tell fact
from fancy, you are so ready with both kinds of information."

"Fancy will not deserve a demerit, I trust!" said Zan.

"Oh, no, but how can it win a merit? You must give us facts that will
stand water at Headquarters," said Miss Miller.

"I know that the moon was once a wonderful planet like our earth is but
its seas dried up and its surface broke into chaotic mountains--likely
from volcanic eruptions, as its mountains present such an appearance
through the telescope. It has no trees, flowers, or living creature!
It may be grand to look at from this distance but it is really a great
hulk of desolation, and I'm sure I'd not care to live there!"

When Zan concluded, Miss Miller asked how many knew the cause of the
moon's changing so often each month, to our belief. No one ventured to
reply, so the Guide tried to demonstrate to them.

"If I take a round object--here's a stone--and hold it between the moon
and my eyes, the side toward me is dark while the side of the stone
toward the moon is light where it reflects from the moon. Now, suppose
I hold this flash-light for the sun. As I move, or turn the stone
around, the side which was toward my eyes before gradually turns toward
the reflection of the sun's rays upon the moon and thence to the stone.
As we are stationary on the earth, while the earth revolves, we advance
toward the light, then leave it again, thus seeming to see the moon
grow or dwindle as the time may be."

As soon as the girls understood, the Guide was about to turn off the
electricity when the ray showed Nita yawning.

"Girls, if any of you are sleepy we will go to bed. We have been
enjoying ourselves so that I made no note of time," advised the Guide,
looking at the others for signs of sleep.

"Oh, don't say bed yet--we want to hear some more!" cried some of the
girls.

"Really, Miss Miller, I am not so sleepy and tired as my eyes--they
ache dreadfully and I don't know why," said Nita.

Miss Miller knew, however, that it was the stormy weeping of the
afternoon. Trying to divert the girl's thoughts would be the best
soothing lotion for her eyes as well as for her heavy heart. So the
Guide continued:

"Who can tell me where the Dipper is located? The big Dipper, I mean."

After much twisting of heads, one of the girls pointed it out.

"Yes; now I will give you the names of the stars that are to be seen
all the year round. I will give the Latin name too, for almost all
astronomers use the Latin terms but we use our common names for them.

"The all-year stars are found in the northern part of the sky, and of
these the Ursa Major, or Great Bear, is the best known. The two stars
pointing north in a direct line are sometimes called 'The Pointers' for
they point to the Pole Star.

"The Pole Star is always in the same spot and the other stars seem to
move around it. If we could leap from here to the North Pole we would
find that star directly overhead.

"In spring you will see Great Bear almost over your head; in summer
it will be between the Pole Star and the northwest horizon. It autumn
it will be found between the Pole Star and the northern horizon, and
in winter it is between the Pole Star and the eastern horizon. These
positions are very necessary for you to know, for both these stars help
to locate many other constellations. The stars forming the Great Bear
have been known since ancient days--in fact it is catalogued in a book
of stars made over 2000 years ago, and the constellation has not moved
or changed its form since that age.

"Now let us look for and find Great Bear--it is formed of seven bright
stars in a group. Two pointing at the Pole Star, which will assist you
in locating the constellation, and the others to the left of the first
two."

After much wondering and questions, the girls were able to recognise
Ursa Major, and thereafter they had no further difficulty in
immediately finding it.

"The next group of stars are almost opposite the Great Bear, being on
the other side of the Pole Star. It is called Cassiopeia, or Lady in
the Chair. It looks like a great letter 'W' half-over on its side.

"At no great distance from each other you will see two stars placed
between the Pole Star and Great Bear. These bright stars are called
The Guards, as they appear to guard the Pole Star. The old legend says
that Great Bear wanted to get at the Pole Star but the gods placed the
Guards between the bear and his prey to prevent the Pole Star being
destroyed.

"I brought a pair of field-glasses so that you can see the smaller
stars. Now I want you each to take a look at them as I explain about
them," said Miss Miller, taking a leather case from the ground at her
side.

"The two stars I am pointing to are Mizor and Alcor--the first one is
the large bright star, while the second is the small star that seems
quite near to its companion. The Turks use these stars as a test of
eye-sight for soldiers. If a man cannot see these stars with his naked
eye he cannot enter the army.

"It has recently been discovered that these two stars are not really
companions but that Alcor is far beyond Mizor, although, being in a
direct line of vision with it, it appears to be quite near the bright
star.

"It is only during the months of July and August that we can see
distinctly the group called the Great Square of Pegasus. Why it
should ever have been entitled to the name is more than present-day
astronomers can tell. It surely has no resemblance to a winged horse."

"I can't see Pegasus," said Nita, at this juncture.

"Look for a bright square formed of four brilliant stars; they are on
the other side of Cassiopeia, just as far from her as she is from the
Pole Star--it has several stars seeming to form the handle of a pan.
The handle-stars are another constellation called Andromeda, while
the three stars near each other at the end of the handle are called
Perseus. When you have found these stars I will tell you the legend
connected with them."

One girl after another located the stars mentioned while Miss Miller
directed them by pointing or description. The moment the last to
locate all had done so correctly, the story was demanded.

"There once lived a king named Cepheus whose wife was Cassiopeia. They
had one child, a daughter Andromeda, whose beauty was known of far
and wide. Cassiopeia boasted of the unparalleled beauty of Andromeda
so much that the nymphs Nereids heard of it. They became jealous and
begged their father Nereid to avenge them as they alone wished the
honour of being beautiful.

"Nereid thereupon sent a great flood over the land of King Cepheus and
devastated everything. But the effects of the flood might have been
overcome in time had not a terrible sea-monster like unto a dragon been
swept up with it. This dragon went about destroying every one that came
in his pathway. It had been Nereid's order to the dragon to seek for
and devour Andromeda.

"Finally the king sought Ammon for advice. The oracle declared that the
dragon would not go until Andromeda had been offered as a sacrifice.
The king, broken-hearted, told his wife and daughter of the dreadful
verdict, but Andromeda willingly gave her life for the safety of the
land and people.

"She was carried to some rocks and there chained to await the coming
of the monster. Instead, however, a gallant youth named Perseus passed
that way and saw the princess. Her marvellous beauty enlisted his arm
and sword and when the dragon came up from the green water to claim
his victim, Perseus fought with and killed the beast. He then carried
Andromeda back to her home and was given her as bride for his valour.

"The story of the sacrifice and valour reached the ears of the goddess
Athena and she gave Perseus and his bride a place in the heavens, while
the king and queen were not far off. As a reminder to mortals of the
inevitable result of envy, malice, and hatred, Athena placed the dragon
in the sky also, although he can never touch or harm any of Cepheus'
family again."

The girls sought again the different constellations mentioned with
new interest. Miss Miller waited until they had thoroughly satisfied
themselves before she continued.

"You will have to use the glasses to find the three little stars called
'The Kids.' Then, too, the bright stars known as Capena extend somewhat
to the left of Perseus. To the right of Perseus, but farther away, is a
group of stars called Seven Sisters--they are also known by the name of
The Pleiades.

"Now turn your gaze to the right of Perseus, on a line with him, and
you will see a glaring star that goes by the name of Demon's Eye. This
star fades and brightens alternatively, so that the Arabs, a most
superstitious race, felt the Demon's Eye approved or disapproved of
their plans and wars."

Miss Miller got up from the blanket which had been spread out for the
Band to sit upon, and said, "Now we must go to bed. There are many,
many other interesting legends and stars to tell about but it is too
late to review more to-night. In the Fall and Winter when we meet in
our Councils we can take up the ones that appear in those months.
Orion is one of these beautiful constellations; Canis Major and Canis
Minor are two more. The bull, Taurus, which Orion fought, seems to be
charging directly upon him; the two bright stars watching the conflict
are called 'Giant's Eyes.' At home we will study about the Lion, the
Sickle and Berenice's Hair, to say nothing of the Crown, the Ox-driver,
and the Northern Cross, and I know some of you girls will get the Star
Gazing coup. But now, bed for every one of us!"




CHAPTER TWELVE

NITA'S ESCAPADE AND REFORMATION


The following morning the campers were awakened by Wickee, who jumped
about, barking at the birds that sat on the boughs of the trees near
by. Doubtless, the denizens of the forest wondered what strange
creatures were reclining on the spruce beds on the plateau.

As one girl after the other sat up and rubbed her eyes, she looked
about in bewilderment at first, then smiled as the novelty of the
night's experience appealed to her.

"My! I slept like a log!" ventured Elena.

"I never slept so fine in my life," added Jane.

"I'll never want to sleep in a city house again, after this summer,"
affirmed Zan, as she rolled out on the grass.

"All I can say is that I've no kick coming about these beds. I wish we
could lug them back to the Bluff to use every night," came from Hilda.

"There goes some more slang! I haven't my pad here but I won't forget
it," reminded the Tally Keeper.

"Oh, bother your pad on such a wonderful morning! Better look for
breakfast instead of corrections over my slang!" retorted Hilda, a
trifle peeved at being caught napping in her manner of speech.

"Come, girls--we have to have water from the spring," called Miss
Miller at this juncture, from the small fire-place she had built.

At that, the girls jumped up and hurried to attend to their several
duties; soon after, breakfast was ready.

The top of the mountain was so delightful that the Band delayed their
return to Camp until nearly noon. Meantime, Nita grew nervous and
wanted to start back before the others were inclined to go. Several
times she asked Miss Miller the time, and was irritable and impatient.
The Guide kept close watch of her peculiar actions and waited to see
the outcome.

At last Cheokee was started on the homeward road and Nita calmed
down. She was very quiet but when the girls took the road that led to
the house instead of the one that passed Bill Sherwood's house, Nita
objected.

"Well, then let me get out here and walk to the Bluff," she said,
pettishly, when Zan reminded her that Cheokee had to be put up in his
shed and some vegetables gathered for dinner.

Miss Miller did not want to compel the girl to do anything she really
did not want to do, so she suggested that Nita get out at the Little
Bridge and stop at Mrs. Sherwood's for the meat that Miss Miller had
asked the farmer's wife to buy for them.

Nita eagerly consented to this, and jumped out, running down the road
that went past Sherwood's.

The girls, puzzled, watched her for a moment or two, then Zan drove on
to the barn.

Nita was nowhere in sight when the girls reached the Bluff although she
had had quite half an hour in which to get the meat and carry it to
camp.

"She must be down at the cottage being entertained by Mrs. Sherwood.
Shall I run down and see if the meat is heavy?" said Zan to the Guide.

"We'll wait a few minutes longer, then you may start and offer your
assistance in carrying the packages up," replied Miss Miller, wondering
if it would be wise to have Zan go after Nita. Then, realising that her
concern over the girl made her magnify everything, she decided to stop
worrying about it.

Shortly after this, Mrs. Sherwood came up the slope puffing rapidly at
the ascent. She had a large brown paper parcel that she deposited as
soon as she reached the Bluff.

"That meat don't feel heavy when you hold it at the wagon, but it grows
heavier every step you take comin' up the hill," declared she, sitting
down on a stone and wiping her brow with a large handkerchief.

"Why didn't Nita carry it up--she offered to do so," asked Zan,
impatient at the girl's avoidance of a task.

"That yaller-haired miss! Oh, she was too busy keepin' an eye on Jack
Everton's horses to bother about the butcher. The young scape-grace had
a tandem this mornin' an' the girl looked just a bit fearsome from the
way she hung to the side of the seat."

"Why, Mrs. Sherwood, you don't mean----" Zan started to say, when the
Guide, who was standing directly back of her, gave her a warning pinch.

"Yes, I mean that good-for-nothing! What his grandmother ever has him
down here for I'm sure I don't know! She's a nice quiet sort of a lady,
but that rascal! Well!" said Mrs. Sherwood, misunderstanding Zan's
half-completed speech.

Their visitor turned to Miss Miller and continued, "If I had a girl to
take care of I'm mighty sure I wouldn't let her go gallivantin' 'round
the country with that young sport! But I s'pose you know best. Did her
mother say anything in her letter about her?"

"Whose mother?" asked Miss Miller, amazed.

"Isn't that girl's name Brampton?" asked Mrs. Sherwood.

"Yes,--Anita Brampton. Why?"

"Then that letter yesterday mornin' what had Mrs. Brampton's name and
address up in the left corner was her mother!" returned the visitor,
with a look that said, "You can't fool me!"

"Oh, that letter Nita received was from her mother, Zan, not as you
thought, from a post-office nearby!" exclaimed Miss Miller with relief.

"No, it wasn't! I read the post-mark as plain as day! And I know Mrs.
Brampton's hand-writing well enough to recognise it! That writing was a
school-boy's hand--most likely from this Jack!" retorted Zan.

"An' that letter was addressed to you, Miss Miller--not for the girl!"
added Mrs. Sherwood.

"Why, I never got any letter, except from the doctor!"

"And I don't remember bringing one up, either, Mrs. Sherwood. Maybe you
left it down in your house," added Zan.

"No, ma'am, I didn't 'cause I never took them _in_ the house. When I
went to the mail-box to get the mail I had Bill toot for you immejitly.
And you come runnin'!"

Every one looked perplexed and Miss Miller added, "Zan, it may be
possible that it was dropped when you took them from Mrs. Sherwood,
or on your way up the slope. Run down and look carefully along the
pathway."

"It hain't anywhere about where I gave them to Miss Zan, an' I should
think some of you or me would have seen it if it had dropped along the
way," explained Mrs. Sherwood.

"We've been up and down, you know, Miss Miller, and Nita has been over
the ground yesterday noon, and nothing was found!"

Suddenly, the Guide remembered her suspicion of Nita and how she
watched her take a letter down to post in the box. She remembered the
girl's stooping and picking something up from the pathway, looking back
to see if anybody saw the action.

"I think I can find it--we won't say anything more about it at present,
but you're _quite_ sure the letter was addressed to me, Mrs. Sherwood?"
said Miss Miller, calmly.

"Sure I do! I looked over every one good, an' I says to Bill, Miss
Miller's goin' to have plenty of letter writin' to do this summer if
she answers all them things these mothers and fathers of the girls will
be wantin' to know about their children! And Bill knows the doctor's
writin' at a glance--he gets so many from him, and the other had the
name, as I said afore!"

Mrs. Sherwood returned home shortly after her valuable information had
been given, and the Guide continued a lesson on cookery just as if Nita
were present and most obedient. But that didn't prevent the girls from
thinking and wondering what would happen to Nita!

Immediately after dinner the Guide said, "Girls, I am going to the
house alone, for I have an important matter to attend to; you can sew
on your Woodcraft costumes during my absence."

Zan stood in deep thought for a moment after the Guide left them, then
ran after her and called. Miss Miller turned about and waited for the
girl to reach her.

"Miss Miller, our telephone number is 2345 Hudson Park, and Dad will be
in his office from two to three."

The Guide could not control a flash of admiration at the rapidity with
which Zan used her thought and common sense. She looked at her watch
and remarked, "Thank you, Zan; I'll walk slowly and just about reach
the house by two."

The cost of the long-distance telephone never entered the Guide's head,
for it was well worth the money to have the doctor advise her in this
most deplorable incident.

She was so relieved at the doctor's suggestions that she felt like
singing on the way back to camp. She would have hesitated to keep Nita
at camp on her own initiative but having Dr. Baker's permission to risk
his girl's morals by association with the girl for the sake of winning
her over eventually, was like a tonic.

"I don't know but that Nita's very behaviour will have a salutary
effect on the other girls, for they will see how despicable a thing it
is, and surely they will not care to emulate Nita's manners!" said the
Guide to herself.

The girls left alone to work, sewed industriously for a short time,
each avoiding the subject that was uppermost in their thoughts.
Finally, Jane tried to change her thoughts from the disagreeable idea
of Nita's escapade and shared the secret Elena and she cherished.

"Girls, you all wondered what came in that package from the city,
didn't you? Well, it was a birthday present for Miss Miller!"

"Oh, Jane! When is her birthday?" cried Hilda.

"I forgot all about it--it is the last of this month, isn't it?" asked
Zan, turning to Jane.

"Huh, huh! Now try and guess what Elena and I are making," smiled Jane,
exultantly.

Many were the wild guesses made but not one came near the reality. So,
Elena, taking pity, told the others.

Zan looked amazed at the lovely plan and immediately turned to Hilda
and said, "We can't afford to let them get the best of us--now let's
try and think of something novel, too!"

Many, many ideas were suggested only to be refused by one or the
other. Suddenly, Hilda noticed the bead-trimming she was sewing on her
costume. It gave her an inspiration.

"Zan, let's build her a bead-loom and after it is sand-papered smooth
we will decorate it with pyrography work!"

"Great! But, Hilda, who's got any pyrography tools?" asked Zan.

"I have a complete set at home, Zan--let's write a note to mother and
have them expressed down at once!" cried Elena.

So the letter was written and sent down to the box before the Guide
returned. From that time on there seemed to be much pleasant secrecy
among the girls but Miss Miller never dreamed it concerned her
birthday, though convinced it boded no ill.

When the Guide joined the circle of busy workers on the Bluff, she
said, "I never saw a place where there were so many bees! I have been
watching a swarm over by the buckwheat field and an idea came to me.
What do you say to our using some of the money in our treasury for
bee-hives?"

"Bee-hives! Mercy me, Miss Miller, what for?" laughed Jane.

"We may just as well keep bees as any one else! And just think of all
the fun we will have watching and caring for them. Wickee and Cheokee
were valuable additions to our Band, but I believe bees will add just
as much value."

"Well, if you say so, I'm perfectly willing to get stung!" laughed Zan,
making a perfectly legitimate use of slang.

"Bees won't sting if you don't annoy them! We won't tease them, and
after we have some swarms in our hives the bees will get to know each
one of us by sound and smell," explained the Guide.

"Why, I never knew a bee recognised any one!" cried Elena.

"Indeed they do! Some bees are so intelligent that their owners wait
for them to advise about harvesting and haying," said Miss Miller.

"Now, Miss Miller! Stop stringing us!" Zan said, in a doubtful tone.

"But I'm not, Zan. I am in earnest!" replied Miss Miller, laughing at
the quizzical faces about her.

"Then let's order the hives at once. Maybe we can have honey before we
go back home!" exclaimed Jane.

"Hardly! But we will be well on the way there," returned the Guide, as
she went to the tent for pen and paper.

The letter was written and Zan shouted for the postman to wait as she
saw him driving up to Sherwoods' mail-box. She ran down with it and,
just as she handed it up to the man, a tandem turned from the main-road
that went over the Big Bridge and stopped at the side road that went
past the farm. Nita jumped out and stood talking to the young man who
drove, so Zan ran swiftly back to the Bluff, for she did not wish Nita
to think any one had been spying on her.

Miss Miller was called to one side and hurriedly informed of the
culprit's return. The Guide looked at her watch and found that the girl
had been absent more than three hours!

She walked away from the girls pondering what would be the best step to
take with the mistaken child. She hesitated to do any rash thing that
might spoil all the impressions that may have caused the girl to think
seriously now and then. At the same time, Miss Miller realised that
the time had come for stern and definite action on her part, or create
a sense of incompetency in the minds of her charges. That would never
do, as she would lose any control she had held in school or at camp.
She decided finally to have it out with Nita, but alone with her. She
returned to the group on the Bluff just as Nita turned in from the road
that went past the cottage.

"Girls, would you mind taking a tramp up the ravine? Here's my watch,
Zan, do not return for half an hour, or more."

The Guide anxiously waited until they were out of sight on the trail
leading to the Indian cave, then turned and waited for Nita.

"Where's everybody?" called Nita, with an air of bravado.

"On a tramp. I waited to have a talk with you, Nita."

"Well, talk doesn't hurt any one, so talk away!" said the girl,
insultingly.

"Did you never hear that any one wantonly tampering with the United
States mail was considered a criminal and the offence merited a State's
Prison Sentence?" said Miss Miller, severely.

The air of braggadocio suddenly left Nita's eyes and her face blanched.
She stood looking like a trapped thief. After a long silence, Miss
Miller continued.

"I returned from the telephone a short time ago. I was speaking over a
long-distance wire concerning you. I had received word previously that
a letter to me from your mother was not delivered, and I believe you
can explain the cause."

"Me! I didn't get the mail!" retorted Nan, trying to regain her nerve
by showing a false front in speaking.

"No, but you went down over the path after Zan brought the mail here.
I _saw_ you stoop and pick up what evidently did not belong to you--if
actions are to be considered."

Nita pondered and said nothing.

"Nita, I am not reviewing these matters for the sake of humiliating
you, but I want, with all my heart, to lift you above temptation. You
never had a fair start in life, but I want to prove to you that there
are many, many better and far more interesting pleasures for you to
enjoy than corresponding with or clandestinely meeting a young man who
is not fit to associate with Woodcraft girls. If you will but trust me,
you will find what a friend I can be! Even your mother says she can
feel perfectly at ease knowing that you are with me!"

"Mother, pooh! What does she know about me! She never takes the time
to talk with me about anything but clothes, beauty and company! It's
true, she has nagged this past year about my always telling stories and
making excuses, but doesn't she do the same with father? Why should I
be different when I see it succeed every day in avoiding a scene about
bridge games or women he doesn't want coming to his home?"

Miss Miller felt still deeper sympathy for the poor misguided girl and
her voice was more loving as she said, "Where is my letter, Nita?"

"How should I know?" shrilled Nita.

"I am not your mother, Nita, and you do not have to make excuses to
get out of a scene. The truth will be the only way with me to end an
unpleasant interview."

Nita looked seriously at the Guide for a few moments. Evidently what
she saw had a softening effect. She stood with her fingers twisting a
handkerchief for a time, then said, "I buried it!"

"Can you find it readily?"

"If I want to. I know the spot well enough!"

"Then you will go for it when we are through with our talk, but I think
it is time to tell you a few things that I am quite sure you never
heard before. From all I hear, your mother would avoid speaking to you
on this subject, but I have always maintained that it is a mother's
sacred duty and privilege to advise a daughter so that she cannot
possibly take a wrong step during her years of character-forming."

Nita looked about nervously as if she wished to run away, but the Guide
drew her down to a log and sat with an arm over her shoulder. She began
in an interesting way to tell the girl about her own maidenhood and
what a wonderful mother she was blessed with. She attributed all of her
present success and happiness to the warnings and advice of that fine
woman. Then, she said, "I have no idea of marrying or having children
of my own, so I consider it my privilege to help other girls who do not
have the homes where they can seek knowledge for future guidance.

"Nita, dear, I know more than you think I do, of your need of just such
knowledge, and a friend who is eager to help. You have been travelling
the wrong trail all of your life, and it may be that you are now
selected by the Great Spirit to show the mistakes in your home life,
and introduce a new order of things."

After a long talk of past errors, her present misunderstanding of the
life of a Woodcraft girl, and the bright future open to her for mere
acceptance, the Guide concluded, saying, "Nita, you must not rebel at
what I am now going to say."

The girl had listened with surprise at the Guide's first sentences,
which showed that she was acquainted with certain conditions of the
Brampton's home habits. But the poor child had never had any one
explain so simply and conclusively the awful evil finally resulting
from a life such as she was beginning. She saw the entire mistaken
view her parents took and wondered that they could be so blinded to
her well-being. She heard with trembling, of the results of indulgence
in wine and promiscuous fellowship. And Nita wept and was thoroughly
shaken as the kind voice continued showing pictures of what is sure to
come to one who is irregardless of morals and the conscience within us
given by the Great Spirit for the leading along the pathway from earth
to heaven.

When Miss Miller made her final request, Nita was so plastic that she
could mould her into any future.

"Would you mind telling me how this meeting took place to-day?"

"He wrote a letter yesterday asking me to meet him again on the Big
Bridge this morning. When I heard you were all going to night-camp I
knew I wouldn't be back in time, so I sent a letter to say I would
meet him at noon. That's why I was in such a hurry to get back to
camp," sobbed Nita.

"Is he all you would choose in a friend or brother?"

"Mercy, no! Oh, Miss Miller, he is horrid, but he seems to make me do
just as he says when he looks at me with a queer glint in his eyes. He
has money, and when his grand-mother dies he will inherit all of her
fortune, too. Mother says I must marry a rich man when I grow up--she
says it will never do for me to be as poor as father is. And I don't
want to be poor, either!" cried Nita.

Miss Miller gasped at the revelation of the foolish mother's advice.
"Why, Nita, dear, you are only fourteen! You mustn't even think of a
husband yet!"

"But every one says I _seem_ much older; even this Jack Everton looked
surprised when he asked me my age."

"Poor, poor child! What a joy and blessing you have missed by being so
old while still so young! Now, we will remedy this loss and show you
how to really enjoy youth!" Miss Miller had tears in her eyes as she
spoke.

Nita looked at her for a moment, then obeyed the impulse to hug the
woman who had been fearless enough to show her the light on the way.

They sat quietly holding each other for a short time, until the voices
of merry girls reached them from the ravine.

"There, dear, run down and find the letter for me. When you return
your face will be cool and natural again."

Nita hurried away and Miss Miller ran into her tent and threw herself
beside her cot. "Oh, thank you, God! thank you, thank you! I am so
happy over this one lamb found on the steep mountain-side! Safe in the
fold, she will grow to love purity and truth better than evil."

The girls were bubbling with delight over their walk--the bugs, the
birds, and even a snake, had been watched and admired.

"Didn't Nita come back yet?" asked Zan, after a short interval, and no
sign of the girl was to be seen.

"Oh, yes, Nita and I have had a long talk and we are going to be the
best of pals after this," replied Miss Miller. But her tone gave the
girls to understand that not a word of the girl's escapade would ever
be mentioned again.

Nita returned and took the dirty letter to the Guide's tent, leaving it
on the cot.

Later in the afternoon, Miss Miller took the letter and read it with
deepest pity for the girl.

"To think that she read this! No wonder the girl cried that day!"

The letter said that Mrs. Brampton had had her whole life filled with
worry and disappointment over her only child's waywardness. That she
intended trying a different method of training. She knew how Nita
continually lied to her, and that the past year she feared that she was
actually meeting young men slyly when she should be visiting friends,
or at home practising music and studying school lessons.

Mrs. Brampton said she herself had so many social engagements to
keep that she could not be expected to stay home to watch a wayward
daughter. But she had at last decided to do something her dearest
friend had suggested. Nita would be sent to a reform school--a very
select and expensive place, but a reform school, all the same. Of
course, she would have to meet other girls there, perhaps much worse
than she, but at least Mrs. Brampton would not have to bother about her
child's running about the streets.

As long as Miss Miller kept Nita on the farm, it would be all right,
as far as she (the mother) was concerned, but the moment Nita was sent
home, she would be packed off to a safe place.

"No wonder the poor child displays the weaknesses she does. It is
our duty to train her for a better life than the one her mother can
aspire to. I think I would have buried this letter, too, had I been the
daughter of such a mother!"

The letter was destroyed and Nita saw the Guide throw the tiny pieces
in the fire when supper was started.

That night the camp sat about the fire telling stories and recalling
funny things of school-life. It was an atmosphere of unity, and Miss
Miller felt for the first time since they started the Camp that she
would be fully repaid by the improvement of the members, and the
womanhood they would eventually reach after striving for ideals, one
just a bit higher than the other, year after year, until the goal
appeared.

Finally, Zan exclaimed, "Oh, we forgot the Thermos bottle with the
indigestion in it!"

Every one laughed, and Miss Miller hurried to her tent to get the
bottle. It was brought over to the fire and the Guide lit a candle to
enable the girls to see with ease the thing she was about to show and
explain to them.

The two tubes were taken from the warm water in which Miss Miller
plunged a thermometer to assure the girls that the temperature was the
same as the evening before.

"This is the tube in which we put a little whiskey--see the effect the
alcohol has had on the egg? It is shrivelled and even harder than when
it was first placed in the tube, although it has had the same advantage
of digestive fluids and acids that the other tube and our stomachs have.

"Now look at this other tube in which nothing but digestive juices were
left. This uniform pasty mass at the bottom of the tube is the digested
egg. This ought to prove infallibly what a drink of any alcoholic
liquid will do to your digestion, and after a time, to your whole
physical system."

The girls stared with amazement at the result of the test on the
contents of the two tubes, and then looked up at the Guide with an
expression that plainly said, "No alcoholic drink for us, no matter how
alluring or in what company it is presented."




CHAPTER THIRTEEN

A BIRTHDAY PARTY IN CAMP


As the days sped, the Guide felt the secrecy most evident when she
came unexpectedly upon the girls. Surprised screams, and hurried
hiding of bulky articles, caused her finally to realise that it was
for her birthday. Hints had dropped at various times, that some gala
day was approaching, so the Guide determined on her part to give the
girls a great surprise also. She took Bill and Mrs. Sherwood into her
confidence and the result was that everything prospered for her plan
without the girls having the slightest thought of what would occur.

The day before the birthday, Mrs. Sherwood spent the whole forenoon
baking and preparing a feast for more than a score of people. Bill was
away at Hamilton's to see about a large carry-all that Hamilton owned
but seldom used. The Guide was most concerned about having the tents
all in order, and the ceremonial robes in perfect condition.

It appeared that the girls had completed their work, for they had
nothing better to do than watch and offer suggestion for the Guide.
Finally, she called them together and said, "Are you all quite sure of
the dances?"

"Of course, didn't Nita teach us how to do the War dance, the Snake
dance and the Caribou and Scalp dances for _coups_ just as soon as
she perfected herself in the steps, and haven't we got most beautiful
wooden horns and war-clubs?" said Zan.

"Well, let us try them to-day--to-morrow I want to spend the day in
another quest. Something I haven't mentioned before, but which I have
given much thought to," said Miss Miller, seriously.

"To-morrow! Oh, Miss Miller, not to-morrow! That is our regular
ice-cream day, and if you take us away on a hike or nature-study we
won't be here to freeze the cream!" argued Zan.

Miss Miller admired Zan's clever acting but she, too, felt she must act
a part or the sly girls would discover her secret. So she said, "Oh,
ice-cream can be enjoyed the next day just as well as to-morrow."

The girls looked at each other smilingly, but seemed agreed upon
humouring the Guide with the dances. They always enjoyed these, as they
were so unusual, so now they soon entered into the sport with a zest
and energy not to be found in common dancing.

Miss Miller was thoroughly satisfied with the exhibition and clapped
approvingly. While the girls sat down, panting, she said, "Each one
of us can take down and put up a tent in the required time; we can
make fires with wild-wood materials only, we can show city folks how
to make the finest bed possible, and teach some how to give first aid
when needed. What with our sets of rubbing sticks made by hand, our
bead-looms, butterfly nets, and Tally Books, I think we have a mighty
fine showing for a month's work, don't you?"

"Not only that, but just think of all we can do now, that we never
dreamed of knowing! Hitch a horse and repair the harness, make or patch
garments, cook digestible meals, use a knife and hatchet in the woods,
and build an article of lumber," added Zan, proudly.

"In fact, we have learned so much that it will take a review of our
Tally Books to prove all that has been done," said Jane.

"Yes, girls, I am highly complimented by the progress you all have
made, but I regret deeply that no one is here to enjoy our work as we
do ourselves," sighed Miss Miller.

"Oh, don't worry over that, Miss Miller; toward the end of summer we
will invite a crowd down and take the day in showing off. That will be
a fine time to get a crowd of our schoolchums here and see how they
take to Woodcrafting, eh?" said Zan, looking about at the others.

"That's so! And by the time we get home we'll have a swarm of girls
buzzing about waiting to be admitted," giggled Hilda.

"I bet there's a lot of them sorry this minute that they didn't join
when I invited them to!" said Zan, decidedly.

"Well, girls, I have an errand at Sherwoods' so I will run down, but
I'll be back inside of an hour," confessed the Guide, as she started
down the slope.

The girls smiled as soon as she had disappeared and Zan said, "Now,
let's wrap them up and fix things up before she gets back."

Thereupon, the four girls ran to their tents and were noisily occupied
for a time while Nita quietly took a package from under her cot and
wrapped it also, using a narrow baby ribbon to tie it up.

Hilda was astonished, as she had no idea Nita had made a gift for the
Guide, although she had spent many hours by herself during the past
week. She had showed a desire to join in the gift-making when Zan and
Jane told her of the decorated bead-loom and the butterfly tray they
were making, but she gave no further sign of personal interest in their
gifts. Hilda had not been able to see just what Nita made but she knew
it was something that was made by hand. Believing that she wished it
kept secret, Hilda whispered to Nita that she wouldn't tell!

The following morning the sun shone brightly down through the leaves of
the trees, causing Wickee to blink his eyes before any of the Band were
stirring. Being unduly awakened, Wickee decided it was high time for
the others to be up, so he jumped upon the cots and pulled the sheets
about until the girls shrieked at him to desist.

Miss Miller had, for some unknown cause, set her alarm clock and now it
began ringing its warning to get up. Soon every one was out and wishing
her many happy returns of the day. The breakfast was under way before
any hint of unusual things occurred. Then, as the Guide hurried to the
place where the cloth was spread she almost collided with Zan carrying
a long mysterious parcel. Both laughed, but the Guide returned to the
fire while Zan placed the gift on the grass where Miss Miller sat.

Jane and Elena added their gift, and Nita sidled over sheepishly and
laid down a wrapped gift, much to the delight of the other girls. Then
all ran over to assist in serving the breakfast.

Miss Miller was highly pleased and seemed greatly surprised at the
unexpected gifts, but, upon opening them, she was most sincere in her
exclamations of pleasure.

Not only had Jane and Elena won _coups_ in finding and properly
mounting beautiful butterflies and insects, but they had chosen the
finest specimens and arranged them in a tray as they had planned. With
the feathery grasses and a few leaves on the pure white cotton, they
made a dainty gift when securely covered with glass and framed with
cherry-wood having a brass handle on each end of the tray.

They finished the tray and found there was ample time to make a large
picture of blue-prints of natural flowers and frame it. The delicate
veining and tiny picoted edges of the leaves stood out in wonderful
contrast on the dark-blue paper. This group had been framed in moulding
sawed and joined and rubbed with oil by the two girls. Later, they
confided to the others that they had scoured the tool-house for bits
of moulding and Bill was well-nigh crazy showing them how to join the
corners.

Zan and Hilda made a beautiful bead-loom--a work of art. The design
burnt in on the top of the flat board was executed most artistically,
and the uprights, wheels and winder, were accurately fitted to work
smoothly.

Beside this, the two girls wove a braided mat similar to those in the
farm-house, to the manufacture of which Mrs. Sherwood donated cut
strips of rags.

But the gift that gave the keenest pleasure to the Guide, because made
by Nita, proving her change of consciousness, was a Tomtom, beautifully
decorated. So meritorious was it that Miss Miller exclaimed upon seeing
it, "Why, Nita, I believe you can win a grand _coup_ for this beautiful
work!"

Nita was delighted and explained how she made it. How the frame was
made of the circle of an old bentwood chair, the pieces of which were
found in the barn. How Bill stopped at the saddler's in Junction and
obtained a piece of raw-hide for her. How hard it had been to lace the
raw-hide to the frame and the difficulty she had in decorating the
Totem on the Tomtom.

True admiration was so rare a thing in Nita's experience of life that
she felt embarrassed at first, but the Guide made her feel more at
ease by seeking diligently for her handkerchief and not finding it.
Before anything could be done to relieve the tension of the situation,
the tears rolled from under Miss Miller's lids and trickled over her
cheeks. At a sudden gurgle from Zan, every one burst out laughing
hysterically.

"Well, I don't care if you did catch me crying like an infant!"
declared Miss Miller, still laughing. "But they were tears of gladness
at the demonstration of your love and sacrifice."

"That Tomtom isn't all, either, Miss Miller!" cried Nita, eagerly.
"When I saw the others make two things, I said I would, too, so I wrote
to the doctor for the things I couldn't get here."

"Oh, do let us see what it is! We will promise to wait patiently for
you to finish it!" exclaimed the Guide, eagerly.

Only too glad to show it, Nita ran to her tent and drew a long package
from under the cot. Running back with it, she displayed a target
half-finished and a long paper parcel which proved to be a bow and some
arrows sent down by the doctor.

"Girls, I believe Nita made and thought of the best of all our gifts!"
exclaimed Elena, carefully testing the bow.

"Well, one thing is certain! We can all enjoy the target and the Tomtom
will help us in dancing," added Miss Miller.

"That's what made me think of making one--I just hated to dance without
music or rhythm to step by!" said Nita, happily.

A shout from Sherwoods' cottage reminded Miss Miller of some important
duty she was delaying, so she hurried away after saying that she would
be back in half an hour.

The moment breakfast dishes were washed the girls tried a dance while
one beat the Tomtom. Then Zan suggested that they try the bow and
arrows.

"Maybe we can practise and win an archery _coup_ soon!" exclaimed Hilda.

"We hadn't thought of that--yes, let's try for it!" added Jane, as they
hurried to select each one an arrow.

As Miss Miller returned to the Bluff her face was happy and smiling, so
that Zan asked, "Well, what have you planned now to celebrate the day
with?"

"What do you girls want to do?" asked she.

"Take a long ride to Junction and do some buying at the stores!"
replied Nita.

"Oh, mercy me, no! Better hike over the hills and hunt for more wild
flowers to finish our collection for a _coup_!" cried Elena.

"I'll tell you what, girls! Let's stay right here and work on the new
bead-loom and make a few bead-bands!" said Jane, watching Miss Miller
suspiciously.

The Guide appeared to be most anxious at that and said, "How foolish to
waste a perfect day about camp! Let's take the morning for the woods,
and spend the afternoon in camp!"

At that, Jane felt sure she had stumbled over the Guide's secret but
she kept it to herself, and eagerly abetted all effort to get the girls
away from the Bluff as soon as could be.

During the walk that morning they found enough wild flowers to
make their fifty varieties so that each could claim a _coup_. Jane
determined to keep on and find fifty more to win a grand _coup_.

On the return walk, Miss Miller found some splendid rushes and the
place was marked so that it could be quickly found again when they had
more time to stop and cut the rushes.

"We ought to be able to make some lovely mats and baskets from them,
don't you think so?" asked Nita, eagerly.

"Yes, indeed! But we have other work for to-day, and rushes will wait
better here than at camp," replied the Guide, who appeared to be very
anxious to get back to camp. She frequently consulted her watch and
felt impatient when one of the girls wanted to stop and examine a plant
or leaf.

"You're sure you all have your Tally Books up to date?" queried Miss
Miller, as they drew near the Big Bridge.

"Sure! Didn't you ask us to bring them right up to yesterday's
Council!" wondered Zan.

Jane almost laughed aloud at the puzzled expression of the other girls,
but she held her peace like a martyr.

Just as they passed through Sherwoods' grass-plot Zan spied the
carry-all from Hamilton's, standing in the road. Two heavy horses were
hitched to it, but they were tied to a post while their noses were
buried in feed-bags.

"Well, I'm daffy! If I can see what that rig is doing over here!"
exclaimed Zan.

Miss Miller had hurried on up the slope but Jane exploded with pent-up
mirth. Zan looked at her keenly for a second, then ran after the Guide.
The other three girls followed, conscious of the subdued excitement in
the air.

Arrived on the Bluff, the girls were dumbfounded to find a grand feast
spread out on the rocks. Mrs. Sherwood was busy by the ice-chest
placing some dish inside, but the rest of the birthday feast was
waiting on the cloth: four had to be used to make a large enough place.
About the outer edges of the linen were more than two dozen plates and
silver for each.

The girls turned to question Miss Miller and found her laughing
heartily at their surprise. Before anything further could be done, Zan
caught sight of some familiar form in her tent. With a shout of "Daddy!
Daddy!" she rushed madly over and found herself surrounded by her
entire family.

They came out laughing at the faces of the other girls. In another
moment, Jane's family appeared from behind a tent. That gave the cue
to others, and soon, Elena's mother and Hilda's brother came over to
join the others. The doctor explained that her mother could not leave a
serious case she had but sent a letter instead for Hilda to enjoy.

Every one saw the consternation Nita felt when she eagerly ran from
tent to tent seeking for some one from her family, but nothing in
shape of father or mother, or letter was found.

Miss Miller suddenly grasped the doctor's sleeve and whispered
frantically in his ear. He quickly went over to the tent where Nita
stood breathless, ready to break down at the awful suggestion that
either her people were not invited or else they cared so little for her
that they never bothered to write!

"Oh, Nita, dear! Come here--I forgot to give you a message from your
mother! I was so delighted to see Zan, I almost overlooked you!" said
Dr. Baker, smilingly, although he felt like murder in his heart.

Nita looked up with eyes full of unshed tears.

"Miss Miller's party was so unexpected and sudden that every one had
the greatest difficulty in reaching each other. Now, I tried again and
again to reach your folks by 'phone, but I heard your father is away on
a business trip and your mother is spending a few days with friends at
Newport. So, you see, Nita, how dreadfully disappointed they will be
when they hear all about this party!"

As he spoke, the doctor led the girl back to the others, taking all the
blame upon himself for not being able to find her parents. But he never
mentioned to any one excepting the Guide, that Mrs. Brampton sneered at
the suggestion of giving up a Newport trip for a visit to the farm, and
left in high dudgeon when her husband declared she was no human mother!

He had to go on a business trip but the doctor said it might have been
postponed if he had really wanted to do so. But Nita was comforted at
the report the doctor gave, and if there lurked a semblance to untruth
in his meaning, the recording angel overlooked it, for his motive was
high and holy.

The great feast went off with wonderful ease, considering the scarcity
of cutlery and glassware. Mrs. Sherwood acted as Chief of the Kettle,
while all of the girls assisted in serving their guests from the city.
Bill occupied himself rigging up the unfinished target, and attending
to other things the visitors had no idea of.

When the dinner was over and everything presented a look of order
again, the doctor excused himself while he went to Bill's cottage to
meet the postman who could be seen driving along the road. No further
thought was given to this, however, as the young hostesses were fully
occupied showing their collections of flowers, insects, and Tally Books.

When every one had admired the hand-craft and woodlore the Band had
learned, they were invited to sit in a wide circle while the girls
entertained them with dancing and fire-making. At just this time, the
doctor returned accompanied by a stranger. He brought the man directly
toward Miss Miller who smiled and held out her hand in greeting.

Then it became known that the visitor was a Medicine Man, an old friend
of the doctor's, who was also a member of the High Council of Guidance.
He had mentioned to the doctor that he expected to visit Hamiltons'
kennels that week and Dr. Baker persuaded him to make it the same day
that they all intended going to the farm, thereby having him present as
guest at the Woodcraft camp. He gladly acquiesced to the plan and thus
he was able to see the work accomplished in a month by a Band hitherto
untrained in the ways of Woodcraft lore. To say he was delighted would
be to express his pleasure in too weak terms.

The girls acquitted themselves admirably in dancing while the Guide
beat the new Tomtom. The Medicine Man gave them valuable hints about
the true Indian Dancing, and complimented Nita on her teaching, then
they made fires in required time, they did various kinds of swimming in
the pool, and in every possible way entertained the visitors in a most
unique and enjoyable manner. The Medicine Man took charge of affairs,
and at last, when everything had been finished, he suggested that he
pin the honours on their ceremonial robes. This was a treat unlooked
for, as Miss Miller thought they would all have to wait until their
return to the city before being awarded the honours.

The blanks for _coups_ and honours, which had been sent from
Headquarters, were soon filled in and witnessed, and the Band highly
flattered by the speech the Medicine Man made to them before taking his
departure.

Dr. Baker accompanied him to the cottage, where Bill waited to drive
him back to Hamilton's place, whence he could catch a train homeward.
While shaking hands with his friend, the visitor said earnestly:
"Doctor, I did not see those girls before they went to camp, but they
certainly are a wonderful group of Woodcrafters now, and I shall
have particular pleasure in speaking of them to my associates at
Headquarters. A sight like the one I enjoyed this afternoon is one
of the best tonics in our work, and it encourages us to progress and
expand."

"Well, if you saw some of those very girls when school closed, a month
ago, you would swear some witchcraft was working for them! I never
saw such improvement in girls in so short a time," declared Dr. Baker
emphatically.

By the time the doctor returned to the Bluff a lively chase was ready
to begin. Zan's two brothers thoroughly enjoyed the plan, and Fiji was
to be Master of the game. He was expected to run away with a stuffed
burlap bag that represented a deer, and hide it in some out-of-the-way
spot where a deer would be apt to find refuge from a clan of hunters.
He had to drop corn for the trail, so the hunters could pick up the
scent and follow. These scents were supposed to cross each other or run
off in a far different direction from which the deer eventually follows
in order to hide itself.

The moment the doctor arrived the signal was given, and Fiji started
off with the deer under his arm. As the animal had been made that
morning, in a great hurry, Miss Miller used a burlap bag stuffed with
straw, and painted the features on its head. Fiji's pockets were
filled with corn, and he was admonished not to take it to rocky ledges
or steep mountain-sides, as the hunters would not have time to stop and
hunt for lost arrows in the dense undergrowth of the ravine.

After about ten minutes' start the hunters followed after the deer. The
doctor felt like a boy again, taking part in the simple sport. Every
one was provided with bows and arrows, and was expected to do their
best in hitting the deer in the heart.

More than an hour was spent in finding the spot the deer had for a
refuge. Then, Zan being the first to lead, gave the signal that the
deer was found. They all trailed along the corn scent until they met
near the entrance to the cave. Here, against the opening, stood the
brave burlap deer, and Zan soon had the satisfaction of chasing Fiji
down the hill-side, fleeing from her arrows, which she aimed at him in
punishment for doing the very thing he had been told not to do. The
doctor picked up the helpless deer and laughingly carried it back to
camp.

"I think Fiji is too mean for anything, Miss Miller, because we
might have won another honour if he hadn't made a mess of the game!"
complained Zan.

But the others laughed heartily, and averred that they enjoyed the hunt
just as much as if the deer had been killed.

All too soon came the time to bid the visitors good-bye, and the girls
heard with pride their parents commend Miss Miller on the wonderful
improvement in them all. The great carryall was waiting at Bill's, so
every one ran down the slope, the visitors climbing in, and the campers
watching and advising, until Bill flourished his whip and rattled off
along the road to Junction.

Gathered about the rock where Council generally was held, the girls
reviewed the exciting times of the day.

"Miss Miller, that was the finest party I ever attended," laughed Jane.

"I smelled a rat when I saw that carryall by Bill's door, but I never
dreamed that Miss Miller had planned it. I thought perhaps some of our
folks were coming down to surprise us, and I was delighted to think it
fell on your birthday," said Zan.

Then the Guide told how she first got the idea to surprise them in
return for their secrets.

"Well, the doctor seems thoroughly pleased with our experiment, doesn't
he?" said Hilda, remembering the wondering looks of all of the parents.

"Indeed he is! He told me, just before leaving, that the remarkable
improvement in Zan and Nita far surpassed the others," said Miss Miller.

"Me! Why, I am always all right! What did he mean?" questioned Zan,
astonished.

"He missed a most familiar habit, and said that the improvement was to
be continued," laughed the Guide.

"Ha, ha! Zan, he meant your slang!" cried Elena.

"Oh, but I haven't quit that yet! I shall some day!" added Zan.

"You have dropped so much of it that it is remarked by those who have
not heard you in a month, but to yourself it may not seem such an
improvement," explained Miss Miller.

"What was it about me?" queried Nita timidly.

"He said he had never seen you in such fine health. He said that your
very hair sparkled with better vitality, and your eyes were a rested
blue now, where they used to be so tired. Then, too, he spoke of the
improved poise in your general manners," said Miss Miller kindly,
patting Nita on the shoulder.

"I'm so glad, but I really did feel badly, Miss Miller, when I found
it was impossible for my family to be here with the others. I am sure
mother would have been proud to see how well I am, and father would
take great pleasure in seeing me do all the things I can do now," said
Nita wistfully.

At that admission, the Guide thanked goodness that she had urged the
doctor to make an excuse for Nita's parents, and she vowed that never a
word of the truth would reach the girl from her. Time, she knew to be
a kind healer, so it would not hurt as much should Mrs. Brampton ever
mention it. But Miss Miller thought she understood Nita's mother well
enough to know that of her own accord she would never touch upon an
unpleasant subject.

The Band were so fatigued that immediately after a light supper they
sought their cots, and were soon sound asleep.




CHAPTER FOURTEEN

RAINY DAYS AND WOODCRAFT LORE


The Band soon settled down into routine life again after the surprise
party, the girls excelling each other in the preparation of simple
meals, swimming, and other requirements of a first-rate Woodcrafter.
They often referred to the Manual for ideas of how to win _coups_ and
honours, their ambition being to be able at the end of the summer to
show a long line of decorations for their ceremonial dress.

Nita was working eagerly on an Indian Clock, or sundial for camp.
Jane was making a correct map of the country about the camp. Elena
was interested in collecting and mounting moths and insects for grand
_coups_. Zan was becoming so expert with rod and tackle that ofttimes
she returned to camp, after a few hours' absence, with a fine mess of
fish. She was eager to win a _coup_ for this claim, and was becoming a
good sportswoman. Hilda, always inclined to household ideas, had won
her _coup_ for cooking, and making an Indian bed. It was her suggestion
that met with great enthusiasm, and that was for all to join in
building a log cabin near the camp site.

[Illustration: PRACTICING FOR THE ARCHERY _COUP_.

_The Woodcraft Girls at Camp. Page 276_]

This was considered great fun, and whenever any extra time was found
the girls were always busy working on the construction of the cabin.
Miss Miller had drawn working plans for them and selected and expounded
the values of timber and trimming.

The weather for the first five weeks had been unusually clear and fine,
but the second week in August came in cloudy, and a penetrating mist
fell every other day, even if it did not rain hard enough to keep the
Band indoors.

"Dear me, I wish it would rain, or do something definite, and be done
with it!" exclaimed Hilda, one morning, as she shivered at the dampness
of the ground.

"Seems to me I haven't seen the sun for an age!" added Jane.

"Well, I'm thankful we managed our _coups_ for star-gazing and outdoor
things while the weather was so good," said Zan.

"Yes, 'cause there wouldn't be much pleasure in a hunt through the
marsh for bugs, or a hike over wet hills for flowers, with this fog
sifting into your marrow," whimpered Nita.

"Girls, you've done nothing but complain over the weather for the past
two days. It positively makes me cold, too, to listen to you. Suppose
you try to change the fog into something like sunshine within," advised
the Guide.

"Miss Miller, how can you, when you feel like that hard-boiled egg that
refused to digest?" called Hilda, who had just eaten a hard-boiled egg
for her breakfast.

"Seems to me Miss Miller believes in Fletcherizing everything in
camp-life so that we, on our return home, will win the _coup_ of being
termed thoroughly digestible even in fog!" cried Zan, making a face at
Hilda.

"One thing Headquarters can say of you, Zan, and that is that your
English is Fletcherized so well these days that grammatical indigestion
from excessive use of slang is a disease of the past," remarked Miss
Miller.

"All the same, there's room for still more improvement," retorted
Hilda, who could not win the same commendation from the Guide for
careful speaking as Zan did.

"I have such faith in modern improvements, Hilda, that I would go to
the trouble of tearing up and discarding old fixtures as long as I
could hope for a thorough renovation. That is a delectable future you
all will take pleasure in looking for," mocked the irrepressible Zan,
with a sweeping courtesy.

The others laughed, and Nita, whose face and manners had changed almost
miraculously since her red-letter talk with the Guide, turned to her
and asked: "What are the plans for to-day?"

"Well, as the rain is making it unpleasant to remain here, and a walk
is out of the question, we might go to the house and light a cheerful
wood fire. With some books and a circle of happy Woodcrafters round
the fire, I can't picture a better day."

"That sounds like a good time, even if it will be a dry one," declared
Zan, giggling at her pun.

"Perhaps you've never heard the old saying of the something-or-other
who always laughs at his own jokes," retorted Hilda.

"Perhaps you're not aware that my native wit is actually penetrating
your thick----" Zan caught herself just in time.

"Huh! Afraid of a demerit! Why didn't you conclude?" dared Hilda.

"Pooh! I should worry over one little demerit when I can relieve
congestion of my manners! So here's to you, Hilda, old girl. I'll put
it over you, old top! Now, does my native wit penetrate your thick
cocoanut?" chuckled Zan maliciously.

Although every one laughed at Zan's taking the dare in such a wholesale
sweep, Miss Miller felt obliged to change the subject, while Elena
quietly did her duty in noting a demerit for the culprit.

Wickee accompanied his friends to the house, and stretched out in front
of the log fire the moment it was blazing in the chimney-place. The
girls sat about, enjoying the cosy warmth for a few minutes before
going to the small library.

"Let's bring the books out here, it is so much nicer and makes you
forget that we are not in front of a genuine campfire," suggested Miss
Miller.

This idea met with approval, and soon every one was squatted in a
circle about the fire. Wick, be it understood, holding his prior
position of comfort in front of the blaze.

"Miss Miller, did you ever take any special interest in bird life?"
asked Elena, who was turning over the pages of a book on birds[B] which
she had found in the doctor's bookcase.

"Yes, indeed, I love birds of all kinds, and I always try and make
friends with any that come near enough. I have been thinking how nice
it would be to construct some bird-houses and coax our little feathered
friends to live with us in camp."

"Yes, yes, let's! We can begin to-morrow if it is clear, eh!" abetted
Jane, eagerly.

"Motion carried without a protest!" said Zan.

"Miss Miller wins a merit, too. Too bad Zan hadn't thought of it, she
needs merits," remarked Nita.

"I was too busy planning something of much more importance to the Band
than a few little flats for newly-weds!"

"What was it--tell us before you forget," cried Jane.

"Well, just this! I am sure Miss Miller has a ton of interesting
stories stored away in her memory, and this is just the kind of a day
to hear some of them."

"Hurrah! Zan's right. We'll vote for Miss Miller to relieve her memory
of some of the bird-tales," added Hilda.

"Maybe the bird-tales I can give you have feathers!" laughed the Guide.

"We won't object to feathers as long as they are not moulting!" came
back from Zan, quick as a flash.

They all laughed at the retort and the Guide continued her argument
by saying, "I never like to _give_ away anything, it is too much like
charity, but a fair return for anything given is a benefit for both.
Suppose I tell each one a story of some bird you find in the book, you
to tell me of its habits, distinguishing characteristics, and other
data."

"It's a go! We all agree to refuse charity when a much pleasanter offer
is made," said Elena.

"Then we will begin with the oldest Indian in the Band--Jane, you
first!" said the Guide.

"Humph! I am very fond of bluebirds; suppose I select them, you'll have
to wait a minute until I find something in the book about bluebirds,"
replied Jane, opening the book they had.

"The bluebird is one of the heralds of Spring; the male appears about
a week before the female. While awaiting his mate Mr. Bluebird visits
his old haunts and gossips happily with his old friends the robins. The
beautiful colours of the bluebird makes him very dear to bird lovers,
for he actually brings a bit of Spring sky to chilled winter hearts. It
is as the poet wrote, 'with the sky-tinge on his back and the earth
tinge on his breast.'

"After a few days the females arrive in loose flocks, and then is heard
the love-notes of the bluebird during his wooing of a mate. When the
mate of his choice and he start to think of house-keeping they find a
suitable place in an orchard-tree, stump root, old post, or a modern
flat as Zan says, made by some friendly hand. Most of the house-work,
such as nest building, is done by Mrs. Bluebird while the master of the
establishment warbles and flits about to cheer his spouse.

"Soon a few pale blue eggs are laid in the nest and in a short time
tiny nestlings appear. Now both parents are out providing food for the
children who eat greedily and grow rapidly. When they are strong enough
to fly they leave home to seek their own fortunes and Mrs. Bluebird
starts another brood."

"That was very good, Jane; now, do you think you can recognise a
bluebird when you see one?" said the Guide.

"Hardly; but a concise description follows this: Bluebirds are larger
than the English Sparrow, being about seven inches long. Upper parts,
wings, and tail of the male are bright blue, the throat, breast, and
sides are brownish; the belly whitish. The female's colour is similar
but of a duller shade.

"In the summer they are found anywhere from the Gulf of Mexico to
Canada, and in the winter they travel as far south as Mexico."

"Now I will tell you a true story a friend of mine told me. I was
speaking of the gentleness of a bluebird when my friend remarked,
'They can fight as fiercely as others if their selection of a home is
questioned.' Then he went on to mention an incident.

"A pair of bluebirds visited the gourd-shaped nest of an Eave Swallow,
built the season before. Deciding after many visits that it would suit,
they made their home there.

"Robins, swallows, and sparrows that came near were fought off by the
male bird from his perch on the roof near the nest.

"All went well until one day, after a severe rain storm, the nest fell
and the half-grown birds scattered about the steps. One was dead, the
others lying quite stunned and still.

"Lining a small wooden box with soft grass and moss, we nailed it up
where the mud nest had been and placed the young birds in it. The
homeless parents watched us anxiously and when we left the new domicile
they took up their interrupted house-keeping with a great flutter of
importance."

"Wasn't that cute of them!" said Nita, smiling when the story ended.

"I guess that friend of yours must like birds!" commented Zan.

"Indeed he does--in fact, there are two friends, a man and his wife,
and I wouldn't dare say which one is fonder of birds," said the Guide,
her voice taking a reminiscent tone as she recalled the valued visits
at their home.

"Now it is Nita's turn, being next in age," said Miss Miller, smiling
in the direction of the girl who was poring over the small yellow book.

"Why, I was so interested that I forgot! Isn't it fine to find out all
about such wonderful things that are about us all the time without our
eyes ever seeing!" exclaimed Nita.

"Perhaps that is what is meant when the Bible speaks of 'eyes have ye
and ye see not,' and in another place something about our eyes being
holden so that we do not see the beauties of Spirit," said Miss Miller.

"I know that my eyes have beheld more beauty in nature since we came
here than I ever dreamed was in the world," said Elena, gratefully.

"I haven't decided on a beautiful bird so much as the fact that we
have heard many of them about our camp--I mean the catbird. I see a
description in this book so I will read it," said Nita.

"The catbird can be found as far north as southern Canada, and in the
winters south as far as Florida. It is nine inches in length, and
smaller than a robin. The upper parts are slate coloured shading into
black on brown and tail. Under parts are slaty grey, with warm brown
patch under the tail.

"Its nest is hidden in thick bushes and is built of twigs, grasses
and leaves. The five or six eggs are of a beautiful green and the
parents utter their distressed call whenever a hostile bird or animal
approaches its young."

"Nita's description is correct, but I must admit that I haven't
any real incident of a catbird to tell you," said Miss Miller. "A
few details omitted by Nita, I can supply however. He is sleek and
well-groomed, being very proud of his appearance. After he is satisfied
with his toilet, he will swing on an alder and pipe his low and
melodious note. But how different his tone, should you approach the
nest while his mate is watching a brood of young. Then they will give a
spiteful and shrill call that is almost rasping on sensitive nerves.

"The catbird is a clever imitator and many a woodsman has been misled
by thinking he was on the trail of a bird he much hoped to secure, or
watch. Suddenly, when he nears the place where he heard the note of
the rare bird, the disappointed human will hear the catbird give a
mocking laugh. It also mews like a cat, so naturally that it derives
its name from the habit. I may add that Woodcraft Indians should offer
an honour to every catbird that overcomes the disagreeable habit of
hoarse mewing. I have heard that a catbird has imitated perfectly a
strain of 'Yankee Doodle' and other music. Sometimes, one will become
tame and live in the home of its human friends, in this way learning to
utter sounds peculiar to mortals. One catbird is said to have cried so
naturally like the baby of the house that the mother never could tell
which it was--baby or bird."

"I think I'll choose a wren for my bird--they are so small and busy all
day long," said Hilda.

"I know a very pretty story of Jenny Wren, so you may begin to earn it
just as soon as you like," replied Miss Miller.

"The wren is found in the eastern states and is about five inches long,
the wings being over two inches. Its colour is reddish brown barred
with dusky shades; under-parts are brownish grey. The most familiar
wren is our house wren which is fond of associating with men, building
its nest near the habitations of its human friend. The nests are made
of twigs and grasses and lined with any soft material the wren can
find. The eggs are from five to six in number and are of a reddish
shade."

"Now for Miss Miller's story!" cried Elena, eagerly.

"One summer a friend of mine was washing windows and her cloth fell
on to the porch roof directly under the window. Her boy had built a
bird-house of an empty starch-box with a hole cut in the end. This box
was placed in a tree opposite the roof. As it had only been there a
day, no one thought of tenants so soon. But the cloth was needed and
she stepped down to the edge of the roof where it lay. At the same time
two little wrens flew away from the top of the box where they had been
watching the suspicious actions of the woman on the room.

"She threw some woollen threads and a handful of crumbs on the roof
and soon had the satisfaction of seeing the wrens return and eat the
bread, then carry the woollen bits into the box.

"That summer two broods were raised and sent forth into the world to
cheer other people. But one little member of the second brood was so
delicate that it could not leave the nest at the début of her brothers.
My friend watched the nest that day, and was most eager to see what the
little thing would do. That night, a prowling cat must have climbed the
tree and caught both father and mother, but the child escaped--possibly
by being caught in the notch of a friendly bough as it fell from the
cat's claws.

"Next morning, the family were shocked to find feathers where the
parents had been, and the boy, climbing the tree sadly to take down the
house, heard a faint cheep! He sought and found the half-dead birdling.
It was carried indoors and its broken leg placed in tiny splints. After
a few days the family saw with delight, that the wren would live. It
grew to be a strong bird, and as soon as practical, it was placed in
a hand-made nest under the eaves of the roof directly over the window
which faced the old box-nest.

"Jenny, as she was called, flew away with her friends in the Fall and
the family all felt that it was farewell forever.

"The following Spring, as my friend was spading about the front flower
garden, she heard a familiar cheep in the tree above her head. She
looked up and saw a wren winking down at her.

"Oh, how much it looks like Jenny, but of course it can't be!"
exclaimed she to the boy.

A few moments later the wren flew down and lit quite near the woman,
and cheeped away as if the story must be told. The boy ran in and found
his father's field-glasses. With these he examined the leg of the bird
and then shouted, 'It's Jenny! It's our own Jenny with the mended leg!'

"And so it was. Jenny remembered and came back to her old home and
remained to raise her family. The following year she came again, and
the next year also. After that she came no more."

"Dear little Jenny--that was a sweet story, Miss Miller," said Nita.

"I want to select grouse for my wild bird--they are so pretty," said
Elena, contemplating a picture of the grouse.

"That will be a good selection--now let us hear about it," replied Miss
Miller.

"There are varied species of grouse, the most common, being found
in northern and temperate parts of America, Europe and Asia. The
largest ones found in Europe are commonly called Wood Grouse. It is a
magnificent bird that grows to be from two feet nine inches to four
feet in extended breadth, and weighs from eight to fourteen pounds.
There are also in Europe the Black Grouse, Heath-Cock, and Black Game.

"The prairie chicken inhabits the western prairies of the United States
and is the best for taste of any of the native grouse. They are much
smaller than European grouse and weigh but three to five pounds.

"In New England and the Middle States the grouse is known better as the
partridge, and in the south as the pheasant. They can be found where
deep woods afford seclusion. They are so much sought after by hunters
that the government had to pass a law to prevent them from becoming
extinct. Their colouring is adapted to the colour scheme of nature and
aids him in hiding from his pursuers. In early May a nest is built in
a dip, or hollow, near the foot of a tree or old stump. The eggs are
light buff and number twelve and more. The young grouse run about with
the mother as soon as they are hatched and in a week they are able to
fly about. A brood remains intact until hunters, dogs, or wild animals
break up the family."

Elena gave a signal for the Guide's story.

"The only one I can think of this moment is one told me by the same
friend who related so many bird-tales to me.

"He thought it might be possible to capture some young grouse and raise
them in captivity and tame them. So, one day, while walking through an
ancient wood road thickly covered with beech leaves, he found a mother
with her brood of little chicks not more than a few days old.

"He endeavored to catch some and advanced toward the little fellows.
As he did so, the mother uttered a hissing sound very disagreeable to
the ear, and flew at him with wings spread and head low. As he did not
stir she charged almost to his feet, then turned and struggled off,
painfully dragging a wing as though it had been broken.

"He was so interested in watching the mother that he forgot momentarily
about the chicks. He followed the poor mother for a short distance,
gaining on her at every stride until he was near enough to pick her up
carefully.

"Whoop--whirrr! away she flew with no indication of an injury to either
wing. When he sought for the chicks not one could be seen.

"Refusing to have a grouse fool him in that simple manner, he hid among
the leaves of a thicket and waited patiently.

"After a time a whirr of wings flew by the thicket and soon the mother
called _Kwit, kwit_! Then, out of the leaves came the little fellows,
and hopped about their mother. They had been hidden under leaves nearby
and so quiet had they kept that not a sound or peep of any of them
betrayed the hiding place."

"Did he catch them?" eagerly asked Elena.

"No, indeed, he smiled at the solicitude of the mother and the rare
obedience of the children who had been taught what they must do in
times of danger, so that he walked back home empty-handed."

"I s'pose wild animals eat lots of them?" ventured Hilda.

"Yes, the grouse is hunted both by man and beast. But the grouse knows
by instinct just what to do, so they sit up in the branches of a tree
during the night hours when four-footed hunters seek to catch them.
Then, they find a new peril awaiting them if an owl happens to be near.
Owls love to feast on a nice plump grouse.

"Beside the owl, the grouse is exposed to the cold of winter when
he has to flee to the branch of a tree; if snow covers the ground
sufficiently to blanket him he dives head first from his perch into the
soft hiding place and it closes over him, keeping him warm and giving
protection at the same time."

"Humph! I could yearn for the millennium-time when the lion and lamb
shall walk together, for then the grouse will be quite safe, won't he?"
said Zan, almost in tears over the troubles of the little brown bird.

"Yes, that will be a wonderful time, Zan, and we shall all be at peace
there," replied Miss Miller, looking away out of the open door.

"Now see what you started, Zan Baker!" whispered Elena, who was
impatient to continue the bird stories.

Miss Miller laughed and Zan retorted, "A demerit for Elena--using
slang!"

"I've chosen the hawk--not because it is beautiful or lovable but
because I do not know much about them," said Zan.

"Well, you have covered three distinct types in one selection, for the
owl, the eagle and the hawk have much the same habits. Now read your
lesson," said the Guide.

"The hawk family has several branches, the most common and the fiercest
is called the sparrow hawk. In olden times the nobles at Court liked to
go hawking--that is they trained hawks to hunt for them. Too, falcons
were used for the same purpose.

"A hawk has a beak much like a falcon, but its wings are shorter and
lacks the pointed tip. It is found in cold countries and in the hills
and mountains of northern climates.

"Among the hundreds of varieties in the world, there are over thirty
distinct kinds in America. Among the commoner known are the pigeon
hawk, the chicken hawk, the sparrow hawk, and marsh hawk."

Zan stopped short and studied the book for a moment, then said, "It
doesn't say anything about nests or the young hawks."

"Well, then I will speak a good word for the hawk for he needs it.
Farmers used to think he was an enemy to be watched and shot on sight.
Recent years, however, have shown that the hawk will not steal a
chicken or pigeon, if there are enough mice or rodents about. Even
destructive insects will furnish a lunch for him, if he can find
enough. As they destroy the very things a farmer dreads for his crops,
they really become a ready-aid to house-cleaning the fields.

"From the reading Zan gave us you might be led to think that hawks only
inhabited cold countries, but that is not so. They are well distributed
over North America and migrate south with other feathered tribes. Some
remain permanently in the south. The name sparrow hawk does not signify
that he kills our little sparrow, for he does not. He lives mainly on
insects. The hawk's nest is generally found in an old tree hollow and
the eggs number four to five--brown spotted in colour and thick shelled.

"Mr. Thompson-Seton says of the marsh hawk, 'that they eat mice,
reptiles, frogs, and birds, but rarely attack fowls,' and Mr. Seton is
an authority not to be disputed.

"Well, we've had our five birds but the manual says we must have about
ten. Miss Miller, it will be much nicer if you tell us about the others
and let us hear and think, then apply our lessons later," suggested Zan.

The other girls heartily approved of the suggestion, so the Guide
looked at her watch and smilingly said, "It is almost time for lunch,
and we haven't been near the kitchen yet."

"Well, lunch can wait to-day--we have all afternoon anyway!" replied
Jane looking out at the pouring rain.

"I think I'll speak of the birds we are apt to find in our woods at
home. Then, should you see one you can better apply your knowledge,"
said the Guide.

"The swallow is one of our most graceful birds. There are the common
barn swallow, the eave swallow, tree swallow and bank swallow.

"The barn swallow is our greatest neighbour; he is about seven inches
long with a body of steel-blue on the upper parts, head, throat and
breast a warm chestnut colour. The outer tail feathers are sharply
forked in shape and are tipped with white. The wing feathers when
spread wide also show a dot of white now and then. They travel as far
north as Greenland in summer and go to South America in winter.

"The eave swallow builds its gourd-shaped nest under the eaves of the
barn, as you doubtless understood from his name. The nests are built
of clay or mud, and often, when the young birds are newly hatched
the weight causes the nest to break away from the eaves and general
destruction results. The brave little swallow begins anew, however, and
soon another home and family are his reward. The nests are lined with
soft feathers and grass and have a small round entrance from which the
lady of the house peeps forth at her neighbours.

"Eave swallows resemble their cousins the barn swallows in shape and
color, but they are not as graceful and lack the forked tail. They are
slightly shorter too, and have a brown ring around the neck.

"Bank swallows are always flitting about in daytime and you can often
see them resting on the telegraph wires. He should be called the
engineer swallow, as he is a digger of tunnels. He cuts into a bank
with his feet until he has tunnelled for a yard or so. In a small nook
at the end he makes the nest.

"These swallows are but five inches long and feed on insects as do all
swallows. They are found in North America and migrate as far south as
Brazil in winter.

"A bird sometimes called chimney swallow is also known by the name of
chimney swift. It nests in the chimneys now, but in days when few white
folks lived in America it lived in hollow trees or caves."

The girls sat with eyes intent on the Guide as she paused and Jane
said, "Fine, Miss Miller, but you still have four more stories."

"I ought to be allowed time to breathe and take a sip of water like any
public speaker does," said Miss Miller, rising to go to the porch where
stood a bucket of fresh water from the well.

"We'll have a drink too, it is more convivial when all join in,"
laughed Nita.

"Since it is Nature's special brew I heartily endorse your suggestion,"
replied Miss Miller, in thought reading again the contents of Doctor
Baker's letter.

Comfortably grouped once more near the fire, the Guide continued.

"A bird we are sure to hear while in camp is the whippoorwill. When you
first hear his cry you will feel startled, wondering who is about to be
whipped. Then, as the cry is repeated over and over from the willows,
or some other tree, you will remember my story.

"This bird flies in the night and rests in the daytime. They build
no nests but lay two eggs on a stump, or on the ground. It is a
reddish-brown in colour, mottled with grey-black and white.

"They eat great quantities of destructive insects and thus prove a help
to mankind.

"Many superstitious folk used to believe that a whippoorwill boded ill
to the family it serenaded, but this foolishness is fast disappearing
as the understanding of bird-life and denizens of the forest becomes
wide-spread. And, girls, camps and organisations like Woodcraft are
actually bringing about the boon of knowledge to deluded and ignorant
mortals."

"Long live Woodcraft!" came from Zan in a deep-toned boom.

The others laughed and Miss Miller assumed a more comfortable position
before she continued.

"There are so many sweet little birds that I am sure we have seen
this summer that I hardly know where to begin. I want to speak of the
oriole, the bobolink, the friendly sparrow, the lark, and, in fact, I
can't repeat more just now. But one bird I must acquaint you with is
the wood-pecker.

"In the spring you will see the red-headed wood-pecker. They used to
be very tame and trusting, but they have thinned out considerably of
recent years. The head, neck and throat are bright crimson, their backs
black, and under parts white. The wings and tails are bluish black, and
the wings in flight are plainly barred with white.

"He builds a nest in a hollow tree and feeds upon nuts which he stores
in hollow fence posts and trees, as well as on insects and slugs. A
favourite delicacy is the fresh sap of a tree. So eager is he to get
the latter that he will drill a hole in a perfectly healthy orchard
tree and drink the fluid that forms in the little cups drilled by the
marauder. In this way, a fine fruit-bearing tree will soon show signs
of the ravages of the sap-sucker.

"Our cheeriest bird-friend, I think, is the robin, for he announces
that spring is surely come to stay.

"I am not going into details about robin, for you know as much as I do
about him, but he ought to be included in our ten, I think," said Miss
Miller.

"Oh, yes, he was a favourite with the Indians, too," added Zan.

"A queer bird I want to tell you about is the loon. You will not
find him about this section of the country, but some day when we
camp farther north in the mountains, we will recognise him readily.
He utters a cry so like the wail of a human being that it is hard to
believe a mere bird can do it.

"The loon is an accomplished fisherman and can dive as well as any
expert, in fact he is known as the great diver. He swims like a fish
and rides waves as easily as a sea-gull. The great speed with which he
swims under water permits him to catch all the fish he wants for food.

"The loon is a peculiarly formed bird, the legs being set so far back
under the tail that he almost topples over when walking on land, but
this very thing gives him the power to propel swiftly in water.

"He builds a nest of grass and rushes as near the water as possible
and two large eggs are laid and carefully hatched by the female.

"The keen desire of sportsmen to capture the birds that evaded them so
cleverly, finally drove the loons of the Middle Atlantic States to find
shelter in the north and west where primeval forest still protected
them."

The Guide got up from her chair as a signal that the story-telling was
over for the day, and the girls stretched out on the rug wishing the
hour was ten instead of twelve.

"If you had all you wanted of one good thing you would never realise
all the good things in store for you," said Miss Miller.

"I suppose lunch is a good thing, but when you have to get it before
eating it, it somehow loses its quality of goodness," replied Hilda,
getting up on hands and knees before standing erect.

"See how funny Hilda looks with her two pig-tails down over her head!"
shouted Zan, while Hilda's head was bent low.

"That gives me an inspiration I needed for this afternoon's
entertainment. I have been puzzled about Hilda's share in it. Now, if
you girls will hurry to help with dinner, we can the sooner enjoy the
surprise I have planned," said Miss Miller.

No further urging was necessary, for each anticipated a treat when Miss
Miller spoke as she did.




CHAPTER FIFTEEN

THE THUNDER BIRD SPEAKS


Immediately after dinner, the Band gathered again in the living-room
and Miss Miller began showing the girls how to make different kinds of
knots. This was something new and it proved very interesting although
it took a long time before anything like a successful knot resulted
from the many twists and snarls made in the rope.

Then, Miss Miller showed them how to make a threadlashing, and to
splice a rope correctly. This also was unusual work and proved
interesting.

"I want to have you each try for a degree of Frontier Scout and eight
tests successfully taken along these lines will win the degree for
you. I wanted to teach you how to solder a tin and temper a knife. You
already know how to use an axe correctly, and knowing how to do the
things shown you this afternoon will make seven altogether. I spoke
to Bill the other day about showing you how to milk his cow, and he
laughed but proved willing to teach," said Miss Miller.

"Oh, Miss Miller, save us that experience!" cried Jane.

"I'd be scared to pieces to go near that wild-looking animal, Miss
Miller!" exclaimed Nita, fear shining from her eyes.

"Why, she wouldn't hurt you," laughed Zan.

"But just think! She may turn and butt me!" said Nita, shuddering at
the idea.

"Ha, ha! She couldn't, Nita--her horns are worn off with age!" screamed
Zan, the very suggestion of grey old Bossy butting making her double
over.

"Well, I think I'd rather lose a degree or take some other test,"
insisted Nita, so the subject was dropped for the time being.

The next hour was given to making records in Tally Books, filling in
claims and witnessing properly all the claims the girls were entitled
to take, and then the question of how to win additional _coups_ and
grand _coups_ started again. Whenever a pause occurred in camp routine
and fun, that seemed to lack something to fill in, the subject of how
to win _coups_ was always the most interesting to discuss.

Zan had gone to the porch to bring in a bucket of drinking water and
she now announced that the rain had ceased and she had seen enough blue
sky to make an old maid's night-cap.

"I don't think it can last!" said the Guide.

"Oh, don't say it so dubiously, Miss Miller. Haven't we had enough of
rain all week?" cried Jane.

"It is through now, however! The wind has veered!" exclaimed Hilda who
had gone to the side-door and watched the weather-vane on the barn.

"The wind may change again within a moment's time," ventured the Guide.

"Oh, pshaw! We'd rather take a chance on the weather than stay cooped
here any longer!" said Elena, backed by the sense of being shut up in a
house, even though the day had been disagreeable.

"Well, are we going to start for the Bluff?" came from Zan.

"Yes, but we may as well take our left-over dinner with us. It won't
be such fun to get that camp-fire burning in the soaked fire-place,"
replied Hilda.

As the suggestion was a good one, the girls each took a dish or pail
and started on the trail to camp.

"It really is too bad we couldn't take the cheerful fire with us--but
I left the wire shield in front of it, in case it blazes up again,"
remarked Nita.

"That was very thoughtful of you, dear. I quite forgot about the fire,"
admitted the Guide.

"We won't need it again, so it doesn't matter much," came from Jane.

"Supposing it begins to pour rain again before night--shall we run to
the house for the night?" said Elena, who had been listening to Nita's
conversation with the Guide.

"It won't rain any more, never fear!" called Zan.

Wickee was not fond of walking in wet leaves, or past bushes that
showered water all over him as he passed, so he dropped to the rear
of the line and walked carefully in the narrow pathway that had been
well-worn during the past month.

At camp, everything looked dismal and uninviting. The rain had beaten
through into the cupboard and all the groceries were sodden. It had
trickled on top of the ice-chest and by following a groove in the lid,
managed to force an entry inside. The consequence was that a pool of
rain-water stood two inches deep about the ice, butter, pudding for
supper, and other items that were floating about when the lid was
raised.

"I hope to goodness, the cots are dry! And the crex mats in the tents!"
complained Nita.

"Humph! Feel of the mats!" laughed Zan, jumping up and down in her tent
to hear the water squash underneath the piece of matting.

"My bed's all dry!" shouted Jane joyously.

"So's mine!" came from Elena.

"I'm thankful to say that mine is dry, too!" said Miss Miller, prodding
the mattress.

"I put the rubber blanket over mine, so I know it's dry as bones!"
laughed Zan.

"That is what we all should have done, for the dampness will permeate
even if the tents are water-proof," said the Guide, spreading the
rubber over her cot.

The other girls followed Zan's idea and then came out to see what was
to be done about supper.

Just as they sat down on some rustic stools that had been made by the
Band during the past weeks, the sun shot forth a ray as if to say
good-night. The birds refused to come out and greet it, however, and
nature seemed too wet to rejoice at the tardy appearance of the sinking
orb of day.

"Let's build a roaring fire of our dry wood and sit about it telling
ghost stories!" suggested Jane, after supper.

So, it came to pass that at bedtime that night, five sought their cots
in a shivery frame of mind, due to gruesome stories, at which each
tried to outdo the other in relating.

It was quite dark and the wind, which had not shifted, was blowing
weirdly through the forest, ever and anon sending a dripping leaf, or
wet twig into the faces of the fearsome girls.

"I can't help thinking of that cheerful log we left burning in the
fire-place at the house," called Jane.

"And what a delightful walk it would be through the woods and over the
buckwheat field!" sneered Zan.

"So long, girls, I'm in bed!" came from Hilda's tent.

"Mark for you in the morning--slang!" quickly added Elena.

Miss Miller, although standing on a thoroughly soaked mat, listened to
the girls with a smile. She had raised a faint remonstrance when the
ghost stories had become nerve-quaking, but the girls laughed merrily
and begged to continue.

Just as she was ready to jump into bed a crack of thunder sounded
directly overhead and a vivid flash of lightning illuminated the woods.

Shrieks from the other tents did not tend to make matters more
comfortable, for it was inevitable that a shower was about to get them.

"Close the flaps and see that your tents are all well secured!" called
the Guide.

In a short time the wind tore along the clearing of the Bluff and tried
to rip up anything that was not rooted in the soil. The rain came down
in a deluge while thunder and lightning seemed to come simultaneously,
until the girls hid their heads under the bed-covers.

The water finally managed to trickle through the seams of the canvas
and soon little pools of water stood in the hollows formed by the sides
of the forms under the covers. Miss Miller had wisely inspected the
pegs and ropes that held her tent down taut, but the girls neglected
the advice given them a short time before. They took for granted that
all would be well with the tents.

Then, a lull in the storm gave the girls courage to call to each other,
"It's over, thank goodness! We're still dry!"

But they spoke too soon. A few minutes afterward a flash and peal of
thunder announced a second storm, still heavier than the first one.
A regular hurricane blew up the slope from the roadway and at every
gust the tents threatened to give up their hold and fly away with the
cyclone. The girls hurriedly jumped from their beds and held on to the
straining ropes.

"I know just how a ship-wrecked sailor feels when the shred of sail is
about to be torn away in the squall!" shouted Zan, so as to be heard
above the commotion the storm caused.

Although her canvas was safe, the Guide arose and hurriedly dressed in
case she would be needed at either of the other tents.

She was just about to light a candle when a horrifying yell, as from
one throat, came from Hilda's tent--or at least where the tent had
been. A terrific gale of wind had forced a way under the canvas and
lifted the tent clear off the ground and flung it against some trees.
The girls were left exposed to the elements and no partiality was shown
by the rain on account of meager clothing.

"Help! Girls, come and help us get the tent!" screamed Jane.

Miss Miller was about to open the flap of her tent when the wind blew
out the lighted taper. She leaned over to place it on the stand when
screams from Zan and the third tent announced some catastrophe. They
had hurriedly opened the tent-flaps and the wind, taking advantage of
the opportunity, blew in and at once filled the hollow canvas opening.
In another second both tents were blown over and down against the
ground.

All five girls flew to Miss Miller's remaining tent and clamoured for
admittance--the water pouring down their backs and their feet wet from
the soggy grass.

The Guide shouted for them to enter one at a time through the tiny
crevice she made in the opening of the tent. They crowded inside and
stood shivering and ready to weep at their predicament.

"What _shall_ we do?" cried Nita, who had never been exposed to such
rude behaviour of the wind or weather.

"We can run down to Sherwoods', but they won't have any beds! They only
have one room upstairs, you know," said Zan.

"You horrid thing, you talk as if this was a picnic!" whimpered Hilda.

"It is. After it is over you'll all sit and laugh at the figures
you're cutting now!" shouted Zan, grinning in a superior manner at her
companions.

Suddenly Miss Miller clasped her hands. "Thank goodness, we carried
the trunk of steamer rugs into my tent the other week when you needed
more room in your tents! I've got them right here and you girls can
drop those soaking gowns and wrap the blankets about you for warmth and
comfort."

The four extra thick blankets were taken from the trunk and one from
the Guide's bed, giving each girl one. Zan had held a match during the
time Miss Miller had to open the trunk, but it had burned down and gone
out again. In the thick darkness the girls took off their gowns and
wrapped the dry blankets about their forms.

The storm ceased as suddenly as it arose, so the Band debated the
possibility of reaching the farm house that night.

"I left that lovely fire!" said Nita, with a sigh.

"And it can't be more than nine o'clock!" added Hilda.

"I say, let's start! We can't be more uncomfortable than huddled here.
And we certainly can't sleep in one cot!" suggested Zan.

"Wait until I see if I can find the candle I had when the deluge came,"
said Miss Miller, groping about for the table.

"We'll need more than one light, Miss Miller," said Zan.

"I'll see if I can find the small stump I had last night," replied the
Guide, finding the matches and lighting one.

The candle was soon lit and the stump found, so all prepared to leave
the shelter of the small tent and seek the house.

Zan carried the new candle while Miss Miller fastened a hat-pin in the
bottom of the stump and carried that. The girls easily avoided bushes
and long wet grass in crossing over the Bluff, although their moccasins
soon squeaked with water.

"I wish I knew where the lantern was--it would be so much steadier a
light," ventured Zan, from the rear.

"I left it at the house the other day--I forgot to bring it back to
camp," admitted Elena.

"I wish we had made a law to make folks pay forfeits for forgetting!"
snapped Zan, impatiently.

"What's the matter with you to make you so cross? You're well rolled
up in that blanket and you've got the torch, too!" retorted Elena.

Zan bit her lip but said nothing. The truth of the matter was that
she felt guilty in driving Miss Miller out in the night with a rubber
blanket wrapped about her. Zan reasoned that all the trouble would have
been avoided if they had all paid attention to Miss Miller's advice in
the beginning and pitched their tents in good ground between the trees
as she did. Her tent stood any gale, while theirs--well, compare them!

"Oh, gracious me! There goes my blanket!" cried Nita, as the article
slipped from her back and fell in the grass.

Just as Zan stooped to hold the candle so Nita could see where to take
hold of the blanket, a puff of wind snuffed it completely out.

"Pshaw! Did you ever see the likes!" growled Zan.

"Here, light it at mine!" called Miss Miller.

Plodding along the narrow trail, now on one side in the wet grass, now
on the other where the bushes shook drops all over them, they finally
came to the maple grove.

"Thank goodness, we are thus far!" sighed the Guide.

"And the worst bit to cross or I'll miss my guess!" retorted Zan.

"Oh, no, we'll soon be through and over the wall of the buckwheat
field. There, we can skirt the edge of the wall until we come to your
lawn," added Jane.

"If you're not mired before you get to the field," said Zan, warningly.

"Why, what do you mean?" cried several voices.

"The Sap bush generally oozes water after a heavy, rain like to-day's.
If we feel water bubbling up about our feet we'd better come back here
and go around the grove," said Zan.

"We've had days of dry weather and the rain will have soaked in the
ground immediately, so I guess we are safe to cross," replied Miss
Miller, wearily.

Zan said nothing more but waited anxiously.

They managed to get over the snake fence safely and part way through
the grove when a strong wind blew the branches of the maples enough to
shake down a quantity of water from the leaves. As troubles never come
singly, the water fell upon both small flames and extinguished them,
leaving the Band in total darkness.

"Zan knows the way, so we'll follow her," suggested Jane.

"Don't blame me if we get stuck!" grumbled Zan, as she unwillingly took
the lead.

All went well for a short time and Zan began to congratulate the Band
upon their speedy arrival at the house. She was about to make a remark
of that kind to cheer them when one of her feet sunk down over five
inches in water. The bubbling about her foot warned her to pull out
quickly.

She did so and jumped back. But the girls behind had not heard the
water gurgle and had kept right on after Zan. By the sudden spring
backwards, Zan and the girl behind collided and both rolled down in the
sodden grass.

"Couldn't you look where you were going!" half-cried Elena, as she
tried to crawl upon her feet. One moccasin had dropped off and she
could not find it in the tall grass.

"I _was_ looking but it was so dark that the eyes I carry at the back
of my head could not see you!" chuckled Zan, to whom a spill more or
less in the wet woods meant nothing.

"I'll have my death of cold as it is, to say nothing of walking in bare
feet through this soaked grass!" complained Elena.

"Instead of grumbling you ought to be glad you won't get anything worse
than your death! Wet feet can't harm you if you've gone the limit,
anyway!" retorted Zan, irritatingly.

"I wish my mother knew of the way I am soaked!" Elena continued,
whining.

"Well, she won't, thank goodness! She'd use every speck of mustard in
our cupboard, and keep us up all night to heat water in which to roll
you and the mustard!" Zan replied.

"Are you two going to keep us here all night while you quarrel over
some one who isn't here, nor even expected?" asked Jane, peevishly.

Miss Miller had quietly chosen the way back, determined to go about the
grove if necessary, so she had not heard the altercation between Elena
and Zan.

By taking the round-about way to reach the house the weary and worn
Band did not cross the front lawn, but arrived at the back door. As
the doors were never locked they soon were indoors and before the
fire-place where Nita's log still blazed cheerily up the chimney.

"Girls, have any of you seen Wickee since he followed us to the woods
this afternoon?" said Zan, suddenly.

No one had, but all had heard the scratching at the front door.

"He wasn't at camp with us to-night, for he would have begged for
supper," added Nita.

Some of the girls ran to the front door and, opening it, displayed
Wickee on the door mat. He was perfectly dry and had been camping on
the porch in preference to returning through the cold wet woods when
his mistress went to camp that afternoon.

As Zan went out to the well to bring in a bucket of water, she called
to all of the others, "Oh, come here and see Lake Superior!"

When Miss Miller and the girls reached the porch a strange sight,
indeed, met their gaze. The torrents of rain that had fallen could not
seep into the ground quickly enough and had run down from the gardens
and grove, over the surface, until the lawn was reached. As the front
lawn had a decided depression in the centre a lake about an acre in
extent was the result.

"Imagine what would have happened if we had stumbled into this in the
darkness, coming by the path we generally use?" said Miss Miller.

"We'd have had something worth Elena's crying over," said Jane.

"Well, I don't care, now! I'll be sick anyway after this soaking!"
whimpered Elena.

"Indeed you won't! You'll go straight home if you continue that strain
of thought here where all of us are proving that health is not subject
to wet skins!" replied Miss Miller, sternly.

Elena was so amazed at the unexpected attitude of the Guide that she
hurried into the house and said not another word of fear of sickness.

The girls assisted Miss Miller in making hot lemonade to warm their
chilled bodies. Then, every one was ordered to rub down thoroughly with
Turkish towels, and pop into bed under blankets which had been warmed
through before the blazing fire.

No one felt the slightest discomfort from the drenching, but the girls
all complained of the closeness of sleeping in rooms. They felt as if
they were cramped in boxes.

"I don't know what we shall do at home. I begin to see what Daddy means
when he says 'folks don't need over-heated homes and poorly ventilated
rooms,'" sighed Zan.

"The doctor is perfectly right, too. Half the ills the present
generation suffers from are caused by poor ready-made foods, lack of
sufficient exercise through rapid-transit, and the sweetmeats and
indolence two-thirds of our women indulge in, to say nothing of late
hours, excitement and major evils," added Miss Miller.

"Daddy has written a book on just that subject, Miss Miller! How queer
you should speak like he does. He thinks that this generation is using
up the vitality and perfect health bestowed upon us by our ancestors,
and if we don't start soon to build a fund for ourselves and our
descendants we will dwindle into a puny race. That is why he is such a
radical for less medicine and more common sense in every-day living,"
replied Zan.

"Well, we'll all read that book, Zan, when it is ready, and no doubt
find out how to live better," said the Guide.

Breakfast was eaten in the house while the welcome sun streamed in at
doors and windows, and the birds came out of their refuges and sang
blithely to one another.

No one wanted to remain indoors any longer than was necessary, so they
started for the Bluff as soon as dishes were washed. The water that
had formed the pond on the lawn the night previous had soaked into the
ground leaving the lawn a soggy looking place, indeed.

As the Band neared the Bluff the sound of rushing water made them look
at each other in surprise.

"Oh, I bet anything, the terrific fall of rain has started a freshet!
If it is, girls, it will be wonderful! Do let's run!" shouted Zan,
leading the race.

"It is! it is! Look at that torrent pouring down the ravine and falling
over the Bluff, Miss Miller!" cried Zan, excitedly, as they came out
from the woods.

It certainly was a beautiful sight! The water that rushed down through
the ravine roared over the Falls; the pool being encircled by the
steep banks turned the water back on itself when it could find no
outlet excepting the narrow stream at the lower end. Thus, a miniature
whirlpool formed which added greatly to the wildness of the scene.

"Our tents are a fine mess!" exclaimed Elena, disgustedly, seeing the
damage made by the wind the night previous.

"Humph! Miss Miller's stood all right! I see now why we should have
chosen a spot as Miss Miller did--we, too, could have anchored our
tents to the tree-trunks and had a better hold for our stakes than
we found in the shallow ground here," admitted Zan, looking over the
wreckage.

"I suppose the sooner we get busy rigging things up again, the better
it will be for their drying out. All that bedding and the cots have to
be dragged out and hung on bushes to dry!" said Jane.

"I'll go down and have Bill come up to help us. We will borrow a line
from Mrs. Sherwood and hang the wet bedding on that," offered the Guide.

All that morning was spent in straightening out the damage of the night
before, and when, finally, tents were well secured alongside the tent
of the Guide, the Band was ready for a big dinner.

The Guide had been attending to the cooking while the girls worked over
their tents and beds, and at noon they all sat down to rest and enjoy a
well-earned meal.




CHAPTER SIXTEEN

THE COUNCIL FIRE BURNS ON THE DROSS


As the days passed swiftly, filled with wholesome pleasures for the
Band, the improvement in each individual was more marked, for the
established unity of the work in itself made for greater effort in each.

Perhaps of the five girls, the greatest change was taking place in
Nita's consciousness and demeanour. It seemed to her that she had been
living in an unreal atmosphere all of her life and but just awakened
to the real delight in living. Her being was over-flowing with a deep
sense of gratitude for the Guide who had been so patient with her
short-comings, and the unusual health, the result of regular hours,
simple food, and natural environment, combined to create a joy that
Nita could not account for. Quite often, Miss Miller would smile
unseen, as she heard Nita trill a few notes of song that hummed through
her memory.

The effect of association and the need of habitual watchfulness to
overcome faults, made a marvellous improvement in the other girls, so
that the Guide was the happiest one of the Band at the result of her
experiment with Woodcraft.

Since the day Nita went driving with young Everton, not a sign had come
from him, although Bill had said that the young rascal was away for a
few weeks, with an aunt at the beach.

Toward the latter part of August, the Band decided to go on a Nature
quest, bringing back any new specimen of bug, plant or reptile, they
might be so fortunate as to find.

It was a perfect day not too warm, with a dazzling blue sky overhead.
The woods and meadows echoed with song, and a general medley of sound
from live creatures.

The girls were crossing a marshy bit of ground near the Big Bridge,
when Jane caught sight of some beautiful spires of goldenrod, although
it was early in the season for it.

"I'm going to pick some for our camp--you can wait or go on slowly!"
called she, to the girls who were ahead.

Balancing on a flat stone near the bank she hoped to reach, she found
herself directly under a bending mass of the golden bloom. Just as she
reached up to pluck at the stem, a huge bumblebee flew out and hummed
near her nose.

"Oo-oo! help!" cried Jane almost falling over with fright.

"What's the matter--a water-snake?" laughed Elena.

"No--but an awful big beast! As big and fierce as an eagle!" shouted
Jane, laughing at herself, when the bee flew away.

Having secured the rod, Jane hurried after the girls and then confessed
that the eagle was but a bumblebee.

"He wouldn't have stung you, Jane, even if you attempted his life! They
are too good-natured for their own protection!" said the Guide, as they
trudged along the field-path.

"Let's sit down by this hedge and have a story, Miss Miller," suggested
Hilda, who loved to hear the Guide's nature stories.

"Just for a few moments, then! We must not waste any time."

"Tell us something about bees, Miss Miller. Now, that our hives have
come and we are waiting for a swarm to live in them, we ought to know
something about their habits," coaxed Hilda.

So, the Guide told the girls all she could remember from her experience
with bees when she was a girl at home. She added, however, that so many
wonderful inventions had come to make bee-culture easier and pleasanter
since her time, that it would be better to secure a good book about
bees. At the conclusion of her short talk, Miss Miller said, "Can any
of you tell me what time the bee was first found of value to people?"

No one could, so Miss Miller changed her question. "Well, can you tell
me why bees were so carefully guarded in the olden times--in Biblical
days, for instance?"

Even this could not be answered by the girls, so Miss Miller explained.

"In those olden days sugar had been unheard of. The only sweetener
they used was honey. Should the bees die off there would be no sweets.
Consequently, people were most careful of their bees. Very few people
to-day realise that honey used in cake instead of sugar keeps the cake
much fresher and the flavour is richer."

Miss Miller got up from the grass and warned her charges that they
would arrive nowhere if they did not start. With a general laugh at the
Guide's eagerness to get somewhere, the girls jumped up, shook their
short skirts and resumed the hike.

They reached the road that passed Hamilton's farm and had just turned
down a narrow path that led across fields toward a wonderful wooded
hill, with three of the girls leading, and Zan on the left side, Nita
on the right side of the Guide, when Nita exclaimed at a gorgeous
butterfly that flew over her head.

Catching the butterfly net from Zan's hand, she chased it, running
swiftly down the pathway past the other girls. No sooner had she
started off than a horse was heard galloping on the soft sod back of
the Guide.

Miss Miller turned and saw a rider coming directly toward her. Thinking
it might be a telegram or other message for her, she turned to meet
him. As soon as she came within good sight of the rider, however, she
saw to her chagrin that it was young Everton. She stood right in the
path wondering what to do.

Everton rode up and expected the Guide to move out of his way. She,
however, had made up her mind what to do.

"Beg pardon, are you eager to reach any destination?" asked the Guide,
holding her ground so that the young man had to rein in his horse
sharply.

"I am anxious to reach a friend of mine--but I do not see how that
concerns you!" retorted the insolent youth.

Miss Miller noted the glint in the eyes that Nita had spoken of, and
she recognised at once the peculiar power some had of hypnotic control
so fatal to peace and happiness of others when employed for vicious
ends instead of worthy help. She noted the deep-orange stain on fingers
as well as the twitching of muscles and sallowness of skin that came
from nicotine. Even his horse rebelled against the nervous twitching of
hands that lacked the strength to control anything, least of all his
own animal instincts.

"Young man, I have every reason to believe that you are molesting a
young girl placed in my charge. Therefore, I must ask you to turn about
and ride the other way, as we shall not allow you to communicate again
with Nita," said Miss Miller, sternly.

"I refuse to acknowledge any authority from _you_! I don't know you,
nor do you know me, although I have heard said that an impecunious
school-marm is acting as governess to a few girls at the Baker farm,"
sneered the young man.

Zan was up in arms at once, but Miss Miller was not one to take
offence, especially when the insult came from a source she thought less
than the dirt under her feet.

"Zan, will you run after Nita and ask her if she wishes to meet
this--this, ahem--creature! If she does not and he persists in annoying
us he will be taught the penalty of a highwayman!"

The rider sneered again but wondered why the woman hesitated over
his name. Had he but known that Miss Miller refused to give him the
privilege of being called a man, and a boy was too innocent a name for
him--thus her hesitation!

Nita was running back with her captured prize when Zan met her and
hastily explained. Nita blanched and clung to Zan's arm. "Oh, I never
want to meet him again! What shall I do?"

Everton had been idly flicking his crop over the nervous young mare's
ears, and the animal resented it by pawing the ground. He took pleasure
in watching the mare snort, so he persisted. Without further warning
the young animal gave a side jump, cleared the low rim of brush that
fringed the bank and galloped wildly across the broken field. The rider
evidently lost control of his mount, for the horse soon came to the
stream where it turned back to cross the road near Hamilton's farm.

Miss Miller and the girls had climbed the bank and were watching the
unexpected ending of the interview. Without a second's hesitation the
horse plunged down into the river and struggled through the water, up
the opposite bank and on, on toward the barns where it had been reared.

The Guide saw it pass the gate-posts safely, then turned with a sigh of
relief and hurried to join Nita, who was all alone when the incident
took place.

"Oh, Miss Miller! what a queer ending to that talk!" breathed Nita,
although she had not heard the drift of the conversation.

"Nita, let this incident prove to you that the Great Spirit will help
and protect you in every way if you will only try to do your part and
remain obedient to His loving ways. I was pondering how to get rid of
young Everton and save you from any unpleasantness at the same time,
when the matter was taken out of my hands entirely and disposed of by
One who knows!"

The incident made a deep impression on all of the girls, and the walk
was continued in silence for a time.

The birds and bees and gay butterflies, however, soon loosened their
tongues and by the time the mountain was reached they were as happy as
ever.

As they crossed a glade on the mountain side, the Guide heard a
familiar buzzing from the direction of an old burnt-off stump of a
hollow tree. She crept toward it softly, and held up a warning hand for
the girls to keep quiet. They tip-toed after her quietly, and when she
smiled they wanted to know what was the trouble.

"A wild-bees' nest in that tree! From the noise, I should say it was
a large one, getting ready to leave and swarm. If only we had a hive
here, we might get it! However, we will get the honey-comb when the
bees come out and that will be a treat!"

"How can you tell when they're out?" asked Zan.

"When they swarm they always leave the comb. If they fly to another
tree this home will be left alone," said Miss Miller.

"Miss Miller, I'm so anxious to start bee-culture that I'm wiling to
run back and bring a hive here!" exclaimed Jane.

"Let me go with her to help?" cried Zan.

"Isn't it too far girls?" wondered the Guide.

"No--we'll hurry Bill into hooking up Cheokee to his light buck-board
and drive back with the hive, across the path we just came by. From
there to this place is not far!"

"Well, all right! Then we'll wait here and watch where the bees fly!"
said the Guide, but the two girls had already left the place.

The girls sat down to wait and watch while the Guide explained many
peculiarities of bees. In an incredibly short time Bill came back with
the hive, the girls following with a wire mask and gloves and a tin pan.

Miss Miller was amazed at their return and Zan said, laughing at their
faces "We met Mr. Hamilton drivin' to Bill's house. He wanted to buy
some of Bill's leghorn hens, so we caught a ride all the way home.
While Bill got the hive and tools we hooked up the horse and here we
are!"

"An' just in time, too! Them bees is goin' t' swarm right clost by,
Miss Miller, 'cause th' Queen is hangin' round that tree like as if she
didn't want t' let go of it!" said Bill.

And so it proved. The queen soon fluttered away and circled about the
glade for a few moments, then settled on a low-hanging bough of wild
cherry tree. Instantly, a mass of buzzing, living creatures settled
about her and the swarm was on--full blast!

When it had been successfully hived and the girls drew a long breath
once more, Bill cracked his hands together in token of congratulation
for himself.

"That's th' neatest job I ever did on bees! Not a single mishap, and
th' queen in that as happy as can be!"

The hive was very carefully taken to the buck-board and two of the
girls jumped up in the back to steady it on the way to camp, for Bill
said it must not be jostled in the least.

The hive was placed just below the Bluff where the sun shone warmly
upon it, and the rocks sheltered it from storms. The mass of honey
taken from the hollow tree was placed in the pan and carried back, the
other two girls and Miss Miller taking turns in carrying it.

A new interest thus created made the next week fly on wings, and the
Band found to their chagrin and deep concern that September was fast
approaching when they must break camp and return to the city.

"Oh, Miss Miller I shall never be able to breathe indoors again!"
wailed Zan.

"And to think of wearing corsets and heeled shoes again! Oh, girls,
what shall we do after this freedom!" added Jane, woefully.

"Oh, Miss Miller! do you remember the day we took our _coup_ for the
walking within the hour--how Nita had to sit down and take off her
high-heeled slippers, rub her feet and go back in the wagon with you!"
and Elena laughed at the memory.

"It wasn't so funny that day, Elena, but I've learned lots of things
since then, and won a walking _coup_, too!" laughed Nita.

"And I noticed that you never wore those high-heeled slippers again!"
added Zan.

"And never expect to again! I've found out what solid comfort I have
missed in wearing freak shoes instead of sensible ones!" commented Nita.

All these things pleased Miss Miller immensely, for she saw permanent
good in the summer's work. But one of the unlooked-for results of the
camp that summer was revealed just before the Band prepared to pack up.
Mrs. Sherwood came up one day and said, with tears in her eyes, how she
would miss the happy family on the Bluff.

"Why," said she, turning to the Guide, "even Bill and me tried your
new-fangled idee of sleepin' on'y we pulled our bed out on the porch.
And say, Miss Miller, it really air fine, ain't it!"

"Do you mean to say that you have been sleeping out of doors, and never
won a _coup_!" cried Zan, laughing.

"I don't know what your coo means, but I know we both like the nice
sweet air of summer nights!" said Mrs. Sherwood.

"Do you still sleep on feathers?" asked the Guide.

"Naow, that's anuther queer thing! The first nights the featherbed was
all right! Then Bill began squirmin' and sayin' it was too heatin'.
Then I felt the same way, so we took it off one night and slept a heap
better on the mattrass. Sense that, we've ben usin' th' plain mattrass!"

"Stick to it, and never go back to feather-beds, Mrs. Sherwood, and
you'll feel a hundred percent better this winter," advised the Guide.

"Bill said somethin' 'bout your sayin' I ought to git rid of my stiff
joints, an' d'ye know, girls! Sense I have hed to climb up an' down
this hill so much every day, I reely am feelin' limber again! I'm
shore I tuck off at least twenty pounds extra fat durin' this summer!"
exclaimed the simple woman, gladly.

"My! That is some reducer! It ought to be advised to city folks who
spend money on massage and Turkish baths!" laughed Hilda, while some of
the girls thought to themselves that Mrs. Sherwood could lose another
fifty pounds and not miss it.

The day before the Band planned to start back to the city, a letter
came from the doctor saying that a whole Tribe of girls were anxiously
awaiting the arrival of the Band of Wickeecheokee girls, each one eager
to plead to be taken in the Band for the winter work.

Miss Miller laughed at the picture drawn by the doctor, and Zan pouted.

"We won't have half the fun when a lot of others are in with us!"
complained Jane.

"Oh, yes, we will! The more the merrier! You have had such a nice time
this summer, that you feel there can never be another as good. And, of
course, twenty girls would be too many for the Bluff or the Farm," said
the Guide.

"Why don't you think we shall come here again next summer?" asked
Elena, sadly.

"Wait till you hear of the plan Dr. Baker and I have for the Tribe. You
will be so far advanced in Woodcraft by that time that you will want to
broaden out and follow after some of the big achievements planned by
the Head Council in New York. Even this winter, you will often think
of this summer and smile at the childish fears and foibles!" said Miss
Miller, smiling.

Those last days a general washing had taken place. All the canvas,
bedding, clothing and other things were washed in the stream just below
the willow, Mrs. Sherwood assisting in all of the work. Toward evening
Bill's horse was brought up and the Guide's patent cradle was used to
carry the camp outfits back to the barn. It had been decided to store
all tents and camping things on the farm until the next summer, so it
spared Miss Miller a great deal of trouble.

The Bluff was finally left as free of any camp-signs as it had been
before the Band arrived, all excepting the log cabin which had been
completed and stood as a strong memorial of some girls' persistent
effort and ideals.

And Miss Miller said, "No good Woodcrafter ever left a camp-spot in a
disorderly condition. It must be vacated and left in as neat and clean
a manner as Nature provided it."

Wickee was going back to the city with Zan and live at her house, but
Cheokee was to be sent back to pasture on the Hamilton farm. It seemed
as if the dear old horse knew the time for his friends' departure was
nigh, for all the night previous to their leaving, he whinnied as he
stood with his head over the lower half of the barn-door, watching
every movement of the girls as they went in and out of the house.
Finally, Zan said she could not stand Cheokee's mourning any longer,
so she took Wickee with her and went up and had a long talk with the
faithful old horse. Wickee was told to remain and keep Cheokee company
that night, and she came out closing the barn door behind her.

Early the following morning, Bill drove up to the porch and placed the
baggage in the wagon under the front seat, while the girls ran about
saying good-bye to every corner and tree near the house.

"Oh, it doesn't seem like two months since we got out of this very
wagon, does it?" sighed Nita, as they were driven through the stone
gate-posts on the way to the train.

"No, and really, not very much has happened, has there?" said Jane,
wonderingly.

"Not as men reckon happenings, dear. But the greatest of all happenings
actually was experienced by each one of you, and that was, that you
each have learned to know yourself and to make the most of all the good
that the Great Spirit gave you to enjoy!" said the Guide, softly.

"Amen to that, says I!" came from Bill, in emphatic tones that made the
sorrowful Band smile again.


THE END




FOOTNOTES:

[A] Author's childhood home.

[B] See "Birds Through the Year" by Albert Field Gilmore.




_This Isn't All!_


Would you like to know what became of the good friends you have made in
this book?

Would you like to read other stories continuing their adventures and
experiences, or other books quite as entertaining by the same author?

On the _reverse side_ of the wrapper which comes with this book, you
will find a wonderful list of stories which you can buy at the same
store where you got this book.


_Don't throw away the Wrapper_

_Use it as a handy catalog of the books you want some day to have.
But in case you do mislay it, write to the Publishers for a complete
catalog._




GIRL SCOUTS SERIES

By LILLIAN ELIZABETH ROY

Author of the "Polly Brewster Books"

  Handsomely Bound. Colored Wrappers. Illustrated.
  Each Volume Complete in Itself.


Here is a series that holds the same position for girls that the Tom
Slade and Roy Blakeley books hold for boys. They are delightful stories
of Girl Scout camp life amid beautiful surroundings and are filled with
stirring adventures.

GIRL SCOUTS AT DANDELION CAMP

This is a story which centers around the making and the enjoying of a
mountain camp, spiced with the fun of a lively troop of Girl Scouts.
The charm of living in the woods, of learning woodcraft of all sorts,
of adventuring into the unknown, combine to make a busy and an exciting
summer for the girls.

GIRL SCOUTS IN THE ADIRONDACKS

New scenery, new problems of camping, association with a neighboring
camp of Boy Scouts, and a long canoe trip with them through the Fulton
Chain, all in the setting of the marvelous Adirondacks, bring to the
girls enlargement of horizon, new development, and new joys.

GIRL SCOUTS IN THE ROCKIES

On horseback from Denver through Estes Park as far as the Continental
Divide, climbing peaks, riding wild trails, canoeing through canyons,
shooting rapids, encountering a landslide, a summer blizzard, a sand
storm, wild animals, and forest fires, the girls pack the days full
with unforgettable experiences.

GIRL SCOUTS IN ARIZONA AND NEW MEXICO

The Girl Scouts visit the mountains and deserts of Arizona and New
Mexico. They travel over the old Sante Fe trail, cross the Painted
Desert, and visit the Grand Canyon. Their exciting adventures form a
most interesting story.

GIRL SCOUTS IN THE REDWOODS

The girls spend their summer in the Redwoods of California and
incidentally find a way to induce a famous motion picture director in
Hollywood to offer to produce a film that stars the Girl Scouts of
America.


GROSSET & DUNLAP, Publishers, NEW YORK




THE POLLY BREWSTER SERIES

By LILLIAN ELIZABETH ROY

  Durably Bound. Illustrated. Colored Wrappers.
  Every Volume Complete in Itself.


A delightful series for girls in which they will follow Polly and
Eleanor through many interesting adventures and enjoyable trips to
various places in the United States, Europe and South America.

  POLLY OF PEBBLY PIT
  POLLY AND ELEANOR
  POLLY IN NEW YORK
  POLLY AND HER FRIENDS ABROAD
  POLLY'S BUSINESS VENTURE
  POLLY'S SOUTHERN CRUISE
  POLLY IN SOUTH AMERICA
  POLLY IN THE SOUTHWEST
  POLLY IN ALASKA


GROSSET & DUNLAP, Publishers, NEW YORK




THE OUTDOOR GIRLS SERIES

By LAURA LEE HOPE

Author of the "Bobbsey Twins," "Bunny Brown" Series, Etc.

  Uniform Style of Binding. Individual Colored Wrappers.
  Every Volume Complete in Itself.


These are the tales of the various adventures participated in by a
group of bright, fun-loving, up-to-date girls who have a common bond in
their fondness for outdoor life, camping, travel and adventure. They
are clean and wholesome and free from sensationalism.

  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS OF DEEPDALE
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT RAINBOW LAKE
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN A MOTOR CAR
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN A WINTER CAMP
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN FLORIDA
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT OCEAN VIEW
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN ARMY SERVICE
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS ON PINE ISLAND
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT THE HOSTESS HOUSE
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT BLUFF POINT
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT WILD ROSE LODGE
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN THE SADDLE
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AROUND THE CAMP-FIRE
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS ON CAPE COD
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT FOAMING FALLS
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS ALONG THE COAST
  THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT SPRING HILL FARM


GROSSET & DUNLAP, _Publishers_, NEW YORK




THE BLYTHE GIRLS BOOKS

By LAURA LEE HOPE

  Individual Colored Wrappers and Text Illustrations by
  THELMA GOOCH
  Every Volume Complete in Itself


The Blythe girls, three in number, were left alone in New York City.
Helen, who went in for art and music, kept the little flat uptown,
while Margy, just out of a business school, obtained a position as a
private secretary and Rose, plain-spoken and businesslike, took what
she called a "job" in a department store.


THE BLYTHE GIRLS: HELEN, MARGY AND ROSE

 A fascinating tale of real happenings in the great metropolis.


THE BLYTHE GIRLS: MARGY'S QUEER INHERITANCE

 The Girls had a peculiar old aunt and when she died she left an
 unusual inheritance.


THE BLYTHE GIRLS: ROSE'S GREAT PROBLEM

 Rose, still at work in the big department store, is one day faced with
 the greatest problem of her life.


THE BLYTHE GIRLS: HELEN'S STRANGE BOARDER

 Helen goes to the assistance of a strange girl, whose real identity is
 a puzzle. Who the girl really was comes as a tremendous surprise.


THE BLYTHE GIRLS: THREE ON A VACATION

 The girls go to the country for two weeks--and fall in with all sorts
 of curious and exciting happenings.


THE BLYTHE GIRLS: MARGY'S SECRET MISSION

 Of course we cannot divulge the big secret, but nevertheless the girls
 as usual have many exciting experiences.


THE BLYTHE GIRLS: ROSE'S ODD DISCOVERY

 A very interesting story, telling how Rose aided an old man in the
 almost hopeless search for his daughter.


GROSSET & DUNLAP, _Publishers_, NEW YORK




CAROLYN WELLS BOOKS

Attractively Bound. Illustrated. Colored Wrappers.


THE MARJORIE BOOKS

Marjorie is a happy little girl of twelve, up to mischief, but full of
goodness and sincerity. In her and her friends every girl reader will
see much of her own love of fun, play and adventure.

  MARJORIE'S VACATION
  MARJORIE'S BUSY DAYS
  MARJORIE'S NEW FRIEND
  MARJORIE IN COMMAND
  MARJORIE'S MAYTIME
  MARJORIE AT SEACOTE


THE TWO LITTLE WOMEN SERIES

Introducing Dorinda Fayre--a pretty blonde, sweet, serious, timid and a
little slow, and Dorothy Rose--a sparkling brunette, quick, elf-like,
high tempered, full of mischief and always getting into scrapes.

  TWO LITTLE WOMEN
  TWO LITTLE WOMEN AND TREASURE HOUSE
  TWO LITTLE WOMEN ON A HOLIDAY


THE DICK AND DOLLY BOOKS

Dick and Dolly are brother and sister, and their games, their pranks,
their joys and sorrows, are told in a manner which makes the stories
"really true" to young readers.

  DICK AND DOLLY
  DICK AND DOLLY'S ADVENTURES


GROSSET & DUNLAP, Publishers, New York




THE LILIAN GARIS BOOKS

  Attractively Bound. Illustrated. Individual Colored Wrappers.
  Every Volume Complete in Itself.


Lilian Garis is one of the writers who always wrote. She expressed
herself in verse from early school days and it was then predicted that
Lilian Mack would one day become a writer. Justifying this sentiment,
while still at high school, she took charge of the woman's page for a
city paper and her work there attracted such favorable attention that
she left school to take entire charge of woman's work for the largest
daily in an important Eastern city.

Mrs. Garis turned to girls' books directly after her marriage, and of
these she has written many. She believes in girls, studies them and
depicts them with pen both skilled and sympathetic.

  CLEO'S MISTY RAINBOW
  CLEO'S CONQUEST
  BARBARA HALE: A DOCTOR'S DAUGHTER
  BARBARA HALE AND COZETTE
  GLORIA: A GIRL AND HER DAD
  GLORIA AT BOARDING SCHOOL
  JOAN: JUST GIRL
  JOAN'S GARDEN OF ADVENTURE
  CONNIE LORING'S AMBITION
  CONNIE LORING'S DILEMMA


GROSSET & DUNLAP, _Publishers_, NEW YORK




THE HONEY BUNCH BOOKS

By HELEN LOUISE THORNDYKE

  Individual Colored Wrappers and Text Illustrations Drawn by
  WALTER S. ROGERS


Honey Bunch is a dainty, thoughtful little girl, and to know her is to
take her to your heart at once.

Little girls everywhere will want to discover what interesting
experiences she is having wherever she goes.

  HONEY BUNCH: JUST A LITTLE GIRL
  HONEY BUNCH: HER FIRST VISIT TO THE CITY
  HONEY BUNCH: HER FIRST DAYS ON THE FARM
  HONEY BUNCH: HER FIRST VISIT TO THE SEASHORE
  HONEY BUNCH: HER FIRST LITTLE GARDEN
  HONEY BUNCH: HER FIRST DAYS IN CAMP
  HONEY BUNCH: HER FIRST AUTO TOUR
  HONEY BUNCH: HER FIRST TRIP ON THE OCEAN


GROSSET & DUNLAP, _Publishers_, NEW YORK




THE RIDDLE CLUB BOOKS

By ALICE DALE HARDY

  Individual Colored Wrappers. Attractively Illustrated.
  Every Volume Complete in Itself.


Here is as ingenious a series of books for little folks as has ever
appeared since "Alice in Wonderland." The idea of the Riddle books is
a little group of children--three girls and three boys decide to form
a riddle club. Each book is full of the adventures and doings of these
six youngsters, but as an added attraction each book is filled with a
lot of the best riddles you ever heard.


THE RIDDLE CLUB AT HOME

 An absorbing tale that all boys and girls will enjoy reading. How the
 members of the club fixed up a clubroom in the Larue barn, and how
 they, later on, helped solve a most mysterious happening, and how one
 of the members won a valuable prize, is told in a manner to please
 every young reader.


THE RIDDLE CLUB IN CAMP

 The club members went into camp on the edge of a beautiful lake. Here
 they had rousing good times swimming, boating and around the campfire.
 They fell in with a mysterious old man known as The Hermit of Triangle
 Island. Nobody knew his real name or where he came from until the
 propounding of a riddle solved these perplexing questions.


THE RIDDLE CLUB THROUGH THE HOLIDAYS

 This volume takes in a great number of winter sports, including
 skating and sledding and the building of a huge snowman. It also gives
 the particulars of how the club treasurer lost the dues entrusted to
 his care and what the melting of the great snowman revealed.


THE RIDDLE CLUB AT SUNRISE BEACH

 This volume tells how the club journeyed to the seashore and how they
 not only kept up their riddles but likewise had good times on the sand
 and on the water. Once they got lost in a fog and are marooned on an
 island. Here they made a discovery that greatly pleased the folks at
 home.


GROSSET & DUNLAP, Publishers, NEW YORK




Jerry Todd and Poppy Ott Series

BY LEO EDWARDS

  Durably Bound. Illustrated. Individual Colored Wrappers.
  Every Volume Complete in Itself.


Hundreds of thousands of boys who laughed until their sides ached over
the weird and wonderful adventures of Jerry Todd and his gang demanded
that Leo Edwards, the author, give them more books like the Jerry Todd
stories with their belt-bursting laughs and creepy shivers. So he took
Poppy Ott, Jerry Todd's bosom chum and created the Poppy Ott Series,
and if such a thing could be possible--they are even more full of fun
and excitement than the Jerry Todds.


THE POPPY OTT SERIES

  POPPY OTT AND THE STUTTERING PARROT
  POPPY OTT AND THE SEVEN LEAGUE STILTS
  POPPY OTT AND THE GALLOPING SNAIL
  POPPY OTT'S PEDIGREED PICKLES


THE JERRY TODD BOOKS

  JERRY TODD AND THE WHISPERING MUMMY
  JERRY TODD AND THE ROSE-COLORED CAT
  JERRY TODD AND THE OAK ISLAND TREASURE
  JERRY TODD AND THE WALTZING HEN
  JERRY TODD AND THE TALKING FROG
  JERRY TODD AND THE PURRING EGG
  JERRY TODD IN THE WHISPERING CAVE


GROSSET & DUNLAP, _Publishers_, NEW YORK




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's note:

Minor punctuation and printer errors were corrected.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WOODCRAFT GIRLS AT CAMP***


******* This file should be named 47279-8.txt or 47279-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/4/7/2/7/47279


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
