The Project Gutenberg EBook of Madame Chrysantheme, by Pierre Loti

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Madame Chrysantheme

Author: Pierre Loti

Release Date: March 12, 2005 [EBook #15335]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MADAME CHRYSANTHEME ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Ronald Holder, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team





﻿

MADAME CHRYSANTHEME

By PIERRE LOTI

TRANSLATED BY LAURA ENSOR

THE MODERN LIBRARY

PUBLISHERS NEW YORK




_Manufactured in the United States of America_
_Bound for_ THE MODERN LIBRARY _by H. Wolff_




TO MADAME LA DUCHESSE DE RICHELIEU.

_Madame La Duchesse_,

_Allow me to crave your acceptance of the following work, as a
respectful tribute of my attachment._

_I felt some hesitation in offering it, for its main incident cannot
be deemed altogether proper; but I have striven that in its expression
at least, it should not sin against good taste, and I trust that my
endeavours have been successful._

_It is the diary of a summer of my life, in which I have changed
nothing, not even the dates, thinking as I do, that in our efforts to_
arrange _matters we often only succeed in disarranging them. Although
the most important rôle may appear to devolve on Madame Chrysantheme,
it is very certain that the three principal personages are_ myself,
Japan, _and the effect produced on me by that country._

_Do you remember a certain photograph_--_rather ridiculous I must
admit_--_representing that big fellow Yves, a Japanese girl and
myself, grouped closely together as we were placed side by side by a
Nagasaki artist? You smiled when I assured you that the carefully
combed little creature placed between us two, had been_ one of our
neighbours. _Kindly welcome my book with the same indulgent smile,
without seeking therein a meaning either good or bad, in the same
spirit that you would receive some quaint bit of pottery, some
grotesquely carved ivory idol, or some preposterous trifle brought
back for you from this singular fatherland of all preposterousness._

_Believe me with the deepest respect, Madame la Duchesse,_

_Your affectionate_

PIERRE LOTI.




INTRODUCTION

At sea, about two o'clock in the morning, on a clear night, under a
star-lit sky.

Yves stood near me on the bridge, and we were talking of the country,
so utterly unknown to us both, to which the chances of our destiny
were now wafting us. As we were to cast anchor the following day, we
enjoyed the state of expectation, and formed a thousand plans.

"As for me," I said, "I shall at once marry."

"Ah!" returned Yves, with the indifferent air of a man whom nothing
can surprise.

"Yes--I shall choose a little yellow-skinned woman with black hair and
cat's eyes. She must be pretty. Not much bigger than a doll. You shall
have a room in our house. A little paper house, in the midst of green
gardens, prettily shaded. We shall live among flowers, everything
around us shall blossom, and each morning our dwelling shall be filled
with nosegays, nosegays such as you have never dreamt of."

Yves now began to take an interest in these plans for my future
household; indeed, he would have listened with as much confidence, if
I had manifested the intention of taking temporary vows in some
monastery of this new country, or of marrying some island queen and
shutting myself up with her in a house built of jade, in the middle of
an enchanted lake.

In reality I had quite made up my mind to carry out the scheme I had
unfolded to him. Yes, actually, led on by ennui and solitude, I had
gradually arrived at dreaming of and looking forward to this absurd
marriage. And then, above all, to live for awhile on land, in some
shady nook, amid trees and flowers. How tempting it sounded after the
long months we had been wasting at the Pescadores (hot and arid
islands, devoid of freshness, woods, or streamlets, full of faint
odors of China and of death).


We had made great way in latitude, since our vessel had quitted that
Chinese furnace, and the constellations in the sky had undergone a
series of rapid changes; the Southern Cross had disappeared at the
same time as the other austral stars; and the Great Bear rising on the
horizon, was almost on as high a level as it is in the French sky. The
fresh evening breeze soothed and revived us, bringing back to us the
memory of our summer night watches on the coast of Brittany.

What a distance we were, however, from those familiar coasts! What a
terrible distance!




MADAME CHRYSANTHEME




MADAME CHRYSANTHEME

I.


At dawn of day we sighted Japan.

Precisely at the foretold moment Japan arose before us, afar off, like
a clear and distinct dot in the vast sea, which for so many days had
been but a blank space.

At first we saw nothing in the rising sun but a series of tiny
pink-tipped heights (the foremost portion of the Fukai islands). Soon,
however, appeared all along the horizon, like a thick cloud, a dark
veil over the waters, Japan itself; and little by little out of the
dense shadow arose the sharp opaque outlines of the Nagasaki
mountains.

The wind was dead against us, and the strong breeze, which steadily
increased, seemed as if the country were blowing with all its might
against us, in a vain effort to drive us away from its shores. The
sea, the rigging, the vessel itself, all vibrated and quivered as if
with emotion.




II.

By three o'clock in the afternoon all these far-off objects drew close
to us, so close, indeed, that they overshadowed us by their rocky
masses and dense green thickets.

We now entered into a shady kind of channel enclosed between two high
ranges of mountains, curiously symmetrical in shape--like stage
scenery, very fine, though unlike nature. It seemed as if Japan opened
to our view, through a fairy-like rent, which thus allowed us to
penetrate into her very heart.

Nagasaki, as yet unseen, must be at the extremity of this long and
curious bay. All around us was admirably green. The strong sea-breeze
had suddenly fallen, and was succeeded by a perfect calm; the
atmosphere, now very warm, was laden with the perfume of flowers. In
the valley resounded the ceaseless whirr of the cicalas, answering
each other from one shore to another; the mountains reëchoed with
innumerable sounds; the whole country seemed to vibrate like crystal.
On our way we passed among myriads of Japanese junks, gliding softly,
wafted by imperceptible breezes on the unruffled water; their motion
could scarcely be heard, and their white sails, stretched out on
yards, fell languidly in a thousand horizontal folds like
window-blinds, their strangely contorted poops rising up castlewise in
the air, reminding one of the towering ships of the middle ages. In
the midst of the intense greenery of this wall of mountains, they
stood out with a snowy whiteness.

What a country of verdure and shade is Japan; what an unlooked-for
Eden!

Beyond us, at sea, it must have been full daylight; but here, in the
recesses of the valley, we already felt the impression of evening;
beneath the summits in full sunlight, the base of the mountains and
all the thickly wooded parts near the water's edge were steeped in
twilight.

The passing junks, gleaming white against the background of dark
foliage, were silently and dexterously maneuvered by small yellow men,
stark naked, with long hair piled up in womanlike fashion on their
heads. Gradually, as we advanced further up the green channel, the
perfumes became more penetrating, and the monotonous chirp of the
cicalas swelled out like an orchestral crescendo. Above us, on the
luminous sky, sharply delineated between the mountains, a species of
hawk hovered about, screaming out with a deep human voice, "Han! Han!
Han!" its melancholy call lengthened out by the surrounding echoes.

All this fresh and luxurious nature bore the impress of a peculiar
Japanese type, which seemed to pervade even the mountain tops, and
consisted, as it were, in an untruthful aspect of too much prettiness.
The trees were grouped in clusters, with the same pretentious grace as
on the lacquered trays. Large rocks sprang up in exaggerated shapes,
side by side with rounded lawn-like hillocks; all the incongruous
elements of landscape were grouped together as though it were an
artificial creation.

Looking intently, here and there might be seen, often built in
counterscarp on the very brink of an abyss, some old, tiny, mysterious
pagoda; half hidden in the foliage of the overhanging trees; bringing
to the minds of new arrivals such as ourselves, the sense of
unfamiliarity and strangeness; and the feeling that in this country,
the Spirits, the Sylvan Gods, the antique symbols, faithful guardians
of the woods and forests, were unknown and uncomprehended.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Nagasaki rose before us, the sight that greeted our eyes was
disappointing; situated at the foot of green overhanging mountains, it
looked like any other commonplace town. In front of it lay a tangled
mass of vessels, carrying all the flags of the world; steamboats just
as in any other port, with dark funnels and black smoke, and behind
them quays covered with factories: nothing in fact was wanting in the
way of ordinary, trivial, every-day objects.

Some day, when man shall have made all things alike, the earth will be
a dull, tedious dwelling-place, and we shall have even to give up
traveling and seeking for a change which shall no longer be found.

At about six o'clock, we dropped anchor noisily amid the mass of
vessels already there, and were immediately invaded.

Invaded by a mercantile, bustling, comical Japan, which rushed upon us
in full boat-loads, full junks, like a rising sea; little men and
little women coming in a continuous, uninterrupted stream, without
cries, without squabbles, noiselessly, each one making so smiling a
bow that it was impossible to be angry with them, and that indeed by
reflex action we smiled and bowed also. They all carried on their
backs little baskets, little boxes, receptacles of every shape,
fitting into each other in the most ingenious manner, each one
containing several others, and multiplying till they filled up
everything, in endless number; from these they drew forth all manners
of curious and unexpected things, folding screens, slippers, soap,
lanterns, sleeve-links, live cicalas chirping in little cages,
jewelry, tame white mice turning little cardboard mills, quaint
photographs, hot soups and stews in bowls ready to be served out in
rations to the crew;--china, a legion of vases, teapots, cups, little
pots and plates. In one moment, all this was unpacked, spread out with
astounding rapidity and a certain talent for arrangement; each seller
squatting monkey-like, hands touching feet, behind his fancy
ware--always smiling, bending low with the most engaging bows. Under
the mass of these many-colored things, the deck presented the
appearance of an immense bazaar; the sailors, very much amused and
full of fun, walked among the heaped-up piles, taking the little women
by the chin, buying anything and everything, throwing broadcast their
white dollars. But, good gracious, how ugly, mean and grotesque all
those folk were. Given my projects of marriage, I began to feel
singularly uneasy and disenchanted.

       *       *       *       *       *

Yves and myself were on duty till the next morning, and after the
first bustle, which always takes place on board when settling down in
harbor--(boats to lower, booms to swing out, running rigging to make
taut)--we had nothing more to do but to look on. We said to one
another: "Where are we in reality?--In the United States?--In some
English Colony in Australia, or in New Zealand?"

Consular residences, custom-house offices, manufactories; a dry dock
in which a Russian frigate was lying; on the heights the large
European concession, sprinkled with villas, and on the quays, American
bars for the sailors. Further off, it is true, further off, far away
behind these common-place objects, in the very depths of the immense
green valley, peered thousands upon thousands of tiny black houses, a
tangled mass of curious appearance, from which here and there emerged
some higher, dark red, painted roofs, probably the true old Japanese
Nagasaki which still exists. And in those quarters, who knows, there
may be, lurking behind a paper screen, some affected cat's-eyed little
woman, whom perhaps in two or three days (having no time to lose) I
shall marry!! But no, the picture painted by my fancy has faded. I can
no longer see this little creature in my mind's eye; the sellers of
the white mice have blurred her image; I fear now, lest she should be
like them.

At nightfall, the decks were suddenly cleared as by enchantment; in a
second, they had all shut up their boxes, folded their sliding
screens, their trick fans, and, humbly bowing to each of us, the
little men and little women disappeared.

Slowly, as the shades of night closed around us mingling all things in
the bluish darkness, this Japan surrounding us, became once more, by
degrees, little by little, a fairy-like and enchanted country. The
great mountains, now all black, were mirrored and doubled in the still
water at their feet on which we floated, reflecting therein their
sharply reversed outlines, and presenting the mirage of fearful
precipices, over which we hung:--- the stars also were reversed in
their order, making, in the depths of the imaginary abyss, a
sprinkling of tiny phosphorescent lights.

Then all Nagasaki became profusely illuminated, covering itself with
multitudes of lanterns: the smallest suburb, the smallest village was
lit up; the tiniest hut perched up on high among the trees, and which
in the daytime was invisible, threw out its little glow-worm glimmer.
Soon there were numberless lights all over the country, on all the
shores of the bay, from top to bottom of the mountains; myriads of
glowing fires shone out in the darkness, conveying the impression of
a vast capital, rising up around us in one bewildering amphitheater.
Beneath, in the silent waters, another town, also illuminated, seemed
to descend into the depths of the abyss. The night was balmy, pure,
delicious; the atmosphere laden with the perfume of flowers came
wafted to us from the mountains. From the "tea houses" and other
nocturnal resorts, the sound of guitars reached our ears, seeming in
the distance the sweetest of music. And the whirr of the
cicalas--which, in Japan, is one of the continuous noises of life, and
which in a few days we shall no longer even be aware of, so completely
is it the background and foundation of all the other terrestrial
sounds--was sonorous, incessant, softly monotonous, just like the
cascade of a crystal waterfall.




III.


The next day the rain came down in torrents, a regular downpour,
merciless and unceasing, blinding and drenching everything,--a thick
rain so dense that it was impossible to see through it from one end of
the vessel to the other. It seemed as though the clouds of the whole
world had amassed themselves in Nagasaki bay, and had chosen this
great green funnel to stream down to their hearts' content. And it
rained, it rained, it became almost as dark as night, so thickly did
the rain fall. Through a veil of crumbled water, we still perceived
the base of the mountains, but the summits were lost to sight among
the great somber masses weighing down upon us. Above us shreds of
clouds, seemingly torn from the dark vault, draggled across the trees,
like vast gray rags,--continually melting away in water, torrents of
water. There was wind too, and it howled through the ravines with a
deep-sounding tone. The whole surface of the bay, bespattered by the
rain, flogged by the gusts of wind that blew from all quarters,
splashed, moaned and seethed in violent agitation.

What wretched weather for a first landing, and how was I to find a
wife through such a deluge, in an unknown country!

       *       *       *       *       *

No matter! I dressed myself and said to Yves, who smiled at my
obstinate determination in spite of unfavorable circumstances:

"Hail me a 'sampan,' brother, please."

Yves then, by a motion of his arm through the wind and rain, summoned
a kind of little white wooden sarcophagus which was skipping near us
on the waves, sculled by a couple of yellow boys stark naked in the
rain. The craft approached us, I jumped into it, then through a little
trap-door shaped like a rat-trap that one of the scullers throws open
for me, I slipped in and stretched myself at full length on a mat in
what is called the "cabin" of a sampan.

There was just room enough for my body to lie in this floating coffin,
which is moreover scrupulously clean, white with the whiteness of new
deal boards. I was well sheltered from the rain, that fell pattering
on my lid, and thus I started off for the town, lying in this box,
flat on my stomach, rocked by one wave, roughly shaken by another, at
moments almost over-turned; and through the half-opened door of my
rat-trap I saw, upside down, the two little creatures to whom I had
entrusted my fate, children of eight or ten years of age at the most,
who, with little monkeyish faces, had however fully developed muscles
like miniature men, and were already as skillful as any regular old
salts.

       *       *       *       *       *

They began to shout; no doubt we were approaching the landing-place.
And indeed, through my trap-door, which I had now thrown wide open, I
saw quite near to me the gray flag-stones on the quays. I got out of
my sarcophagus and prepared to set foot for the first time in my life
on Japanese soil.

All was streaming around us, and the irritating, tiresome rain dashed
into my eyes.

No sooner had I landed, than there bounded towards me about a dozen
strange beings, of what description it was almost impossible to make
out through the blinding showers--a species of human hedge-hog, each
dragging some large black thing; they came screaming around me and
stopped my progress. One of them opened and held over my head an
enormous closely-ribbed umbrella, decorated on its transparent surface
with paintings of storks; and they all smiled at me in an engaging
manner with an air of expectation.

I had been forewarned: these were only the _djins_ who were touting
for the honor of my preference; nevertheless I was startled at this
sudden attack, this Japanese welcome on a first visit to land (the
_djins_ or _djin-richisans_, are the runners who drag little carts,
and are paid for conveying people to and fro, being hired by the hour
or the distance, as cabs are with us).

Their legs were naked; to-day they were very wet, and their heads were
hidden under large shady conical hats. By way of waterproofs they wore
nothing less than mats of straw, with all the ends of the straws
turned outwards bristling like porcupines; they seemed clothed in a
thatched roof. They went on smiling, awaiting my choice.

Not having the honor of being acquainted with any of them in
particular, I choose at haphazard the djin with the umbrella and get
into his little cart, of which he carefully lowers the hood. He draws
an oil-cloth apron over my knees, pulling it up to my face, and then
advancing near, asks me in Japanese something which must have meant:
"Where to, sir?" To which I reply in the same language, "To the
_Garden of Flowers_, my friend."

I said this in the three words I had parrot-like learnt by heart,
astonished that such sounds could mean anything, astonished too at
their being understood. We started off, he running at full speed, I
dragged along by him, jerked about in his light chariot, wrapped in
oiled cloth, shut up as if in a box;--both of us unceasingly drenched
all the while, and dashing all around us the water and mud of the
sodden ground.

"To the _Garden of Flowers_," I had said, like an habitual frequenter
of the place, and quite surprised at hearing myself speak. But I was
less ignorant about Japan than might have been supposed. Many of my
friends had, on their return home from that country, told me about it,
and I knew a great deal; the _Garden of Flowers_ is a _tea-house_, an
elegant rendezvous. There, I would inquire for a certain
Kangourou-San, who is at the same time interpreter, washerman, and
confidential agent for the intercourse of races. Perhaps this very
evening, if all went well, I should be introduced to the bride
destined to me by mysterious fate. This thought kept my mind on the
alert during the panting journey we have been making, the djin and
myself, one dragging the other, under the merciless downpour.

       *       *       *       *       *

Oh, what a curious Japan I saw that day, through the gaping of my
oil-cloth coverings! from under the dripping hood of my little cart! A
sullen, muddy, half-drowned Japan. All these houses, men or beasts,
hitherto only known to me by drawings; all these, that I had beheld
painted on blue or pink backgrounds of fans or vases, now appeared to
me in their hard reality, under a dark sky, with umbrellas and wooden
shoes, with tucked-up skirts and pitiful aspect.

At moments the rain fell so heavily that I tightly closed up every
chink and crevice, and the noise and shaking benumbed me, so that I
completely forgot in what country I was. In the hood of the cart were
holes, through which little streams ran down my back. Then,
remembering that I was going for the first time in my life through the
very heart of Nagasaki, I cast an inquiring look outside, at the risk
of receiving a douche: we were trotting along through a mean, narrow
little back street (there are thousands like it, a perfect labyrinth
of them) the rain falling in cascades from the tops of the roofs on
the gleaming flagstones below, rendering everything indistinct and
vague through the misty atmosphere. At times we passed by a lady,
struggling with her skirts, unsteadily tripping along in her high
wooden shoes, looking exactly like the figures painted on screens,
tucked up under a gaudily daubed paper umbrella. Or else we passed a
pagoda, where an old granite monster, squatting in the water, seemed
to make a hideous, ferocious grimace at me.

How immense this Nagasaki is! Here had we been running hard for the
last hour, and still it seemed never-ending. It is a flat plain, and
one could never suppose from the offing that so vast a plain could lie
in the recesses of this valley.

It would, however, have been impossible for me to say where I was, or
in what direction we had run; I abandoned my fate to my djin and to my
good luck.

What a steam-engine of a man my djin was! I had been accustomed to the
Chinese runners, but they were nothing by the side of this fellow.
When I part my oil-cloths to peep at anything, he is naturally always
the first object in my foreground: his two naked, brown, muscular
legs, scampering one after the other, splashing all around, and his
bristling hedgehog back bending low in the rain. Do the passers-by,
gazing at this little dripping cart, guess that it contains a suitor
in quest of a bride?

       *       *       *       *       *

At last my vehicle stops, and my djin, with many smiles and
precautions lest any fresh rivers should stream down my back, lowers
the hood of the cart; there is a break in the storm, and the rain has
ceased. I had not yet seen his face; by exception to the general rule,
he is good-looking;--a young man of about thirty years of age, of
intelligent and strong appearance, and an open countenance. Who could
have foreseen that a few days later this very djin.--But no, I will
not anticipate, and run the risk of throwing beforehand any discredit
on Chrysanthème.

We had therefore reached our destination, and found ourselves at the
foot of a tall overhanging mountain; probably beyond the limits of the
town, in some suburban district. It apparently became necessary to
continue our journey on foot, and climb up an almost perpendicular
narrow path. Around us, a number of small country houses, garden
walls, and high bamboo palisades closed in the view. The green hill
crushed us with its towering height; the heavy, dark clouds lowering
over our heads seemed like a leaden canopy confining us in this
unknown spot; it really seemed as though the complete absence of
perspective inclined one all the better to notice the details of this
tiny corner, muddy and wet, of homely Japan, now lying before our
eyes. The earth was very red. The grasses and wild flowers bordering
the pathway were strange to me;--nevertheless, the palings were
covered with convolvuli like our own, and I recognized in the gardens,
china asters, zinnias, and other familiar flowers. The atmosphere
seemed laden with a curiously complicated odor, something besides the
perfume of the plants and soil, arising no doubt from the human
dwelling-places,--a mingled smell, I fancied, of dried fish and
incense. Not a creature was to be seen; of the inhabitants, of their
homes and life, there was not a vestige, and I might have imagined
myself anywhere in the world.

My djin had fastened up his little cart under a tree, and together we
clambered the steep path on the slippery red soil.

"We are going to the _Garden of Flowers_, are we not?" I inquired,
anxious to ascertain if I had been understood.

"Yes, yes," replied the djin, "it is up there, and quite near."

The road turned, steep banks hemming it in and darkening it. On one
side, it skirted the mountain all covered with a tangle of wet ferns;
on the other appeared a large wooden house almost devoid of apertures
and of evil aspect; it was there that my djin halted.

What, that sinister-looking house was the _Garden of Flowers_? He
assured me that it was, and seemed very sure of the fact. We knocked
at a big door which opened immediately, slipping back in its groove.
Then two funny little women appeared, oldish-looking, but with evident
pretensions to youth: exact types of the figures painted on vases,
with their baby hands and feet.

On catching sight of me, they threw themselves on all fours, their
faces touching the floor. Good gracious! what can be the matter?
Nothing at all, it is only the ceremonious salute to which I am as yet
unaccustomed. They rise, and proceed to take off my boots (one never
keeps on one's shoes in a Japanese house), wiping the bottom of my
trousers and feeling my shoulders to see if I am wet.

What always strikes one on first entering a Japanese dwelling is the
extreme cleanliness, and white and chilling bareness of the rooms.

Over the most irreproachable mattings, without a crease, a line, or a
stain, I am led upstairs to the first story and ushered into a big
empty room, absolutely empty! The paper walls are mounted on sliding
panels, which fitting into each other, can be made to disappear
entirely,--and all one side of the apartment opens like a verandah on
to the green country and the gray sky beyond. By way of a chair, I am
given a square piece of black velvet, and behold me seated low, in the
middle of this large empty room, which by its very vastness is almost
chilly. The two little women (who are the servants of the house and my
very humble servants too), await my orders, in attitudes expressive of
the profoundest humility.

       *       *       *       *       *

It seemed extraordinary that the quaint words, the curious phrases I
had learnt during our exile at the Pescadores Islands--by sheer dint
of dictionary and grammar book, without attaching the least sense to
them--should mean anything. But so it seemed, however, for I was at
once understood.

       *       *       *       *       *

I wish in the first place to speak to one M. Kangourou, who is
interpreter, washerman, and matrimonial agent. Nothing could be
better: they know him and will go at once in search of him; and the
elder of the waiting-maids gets ready for the purpose her wooden clogs
and her paper umbrella.

Next I demand a well-served repast, composed of the greatest
delicacies of Japan. Better and better, they rush to the kitchen to
order it.

Finally, I beg they will give tea and rice to my djin, who is waiting
for me below;--I wish, in short, I wish many things, my dear little
dollies, which I will mention by degrees and with due deliberation,
when I shall have had time to assemble the necessary words. But, the
more I look at you the more uneasy I feel as to what my _fiancée_ of
to-morrow may be like. Almost pretty, I grant you, you are,--in virtue
of quaintness, delicate hands, miniature feet, but ugly after all, and
absurdly small. You look like ouistitis, like little china ornaments,
like I don't know what. I begin to understand that I have arrived at
this house at an ill-chosen moment. Something is going on which does
not concern me, and I feel that I am in the way.

From the beginning I might have guessed as much, notwithstanding the
excessive politeness of my welcome; for I remember now, that while
they were taking off my boots downstairs, I heard a murmuring chatter
overhead, then a noise of panels moved quickly along their grooves,
evidently to hide from me something I was not intended to see; they
were improvising for me the apartment in which I now am--just as in
menageries they make a separate compartment for some beasts when the
public is admitted.

Now I am left alone while my orders are being executed, and I listen
attentively, squatted like a Buddha on my black velvet cushion, in the
midst of the whiteness of the walls and mats.

Behind the paper partitions, worn-out voices, seemingly numerous, are
talking in low tones. Then rises the sound of a guitar, and the song
of a woman, plaintive and gentle in the echoing sonority of the bare
house, in the melancholy of the rainy weather.

What one can see through the wide-open verandah is very pretty, I will
admit; it resembles the landscape of a fairy tale. There are admirably
wooded mountains, climbing high into the dark and gloomy sky, and
hiding in it the peaks of their summits, and, perched up among the
clouds--a temple. The atmosphere has that absolute transparency, the
distance that clearness which follows a great downpour of rain; but a
thick pall, still heavy with moisture, remains suspended over all, and
on the foliage of the hanging woods still float great flakes of gray
fluff, which remain there, motionless. In the foreground, in front of
and below all this almost fantastic landscape, is a miniature garden
where two beautiful white cats are taking the air, amusing themselves
by pursuing each other through the paths of a Lilliputian labyrinth,
shaking from their paws the sand, which is still wet. The garden is as
conventional as possible: not a flower, but little rocks, little
lakes, dwarf trees cut in a grotesque fashion; all this is not
natural, but it is most ingeniously arranged, so green, so full of
fresh mosses!

In the rain-soaked country below me, to the very furthest end of the
vast scene, reigns a great silence, an absolute calm. But the woman's
voice, behind the paper wall, continues to sing in a key of gentle
sadness, and the accompanying guitar has somber and even gloomy notes.

Stay though! Now the music is somewhat quicker--one might even suppose
they were dancing!

So much the worse! I shall try to look between the fragile divisions,
through a crack which has revealed itself to my notice.

What a singular spectacle it is; evidently the gilded youth of
Nagasaki holding a great clandestine orgy! In an apartment as bare as
my own, there are a dozen of them, seated in a circle on the ground,
attired in long blue cotton dresses with pagoda sleeves, long, sleek
and greasy hair surmounted by European pot hats; and beneath these,
yellow, worn out, bloodless, foolish faces. On the floor are a number
of little spirit-lamps, little pipes, little lacquer trays, little
tea-pots, little cups--all the accessories and all the remains of a
Japanese feast, resembling nothing so much as a doll's tea-party. In
the midst of this circle of dandies are three over-dressed women, one
might say three weird visions, robed in garments of pale and
undefinable colors, embroidered with golden monsters; and their great
chignons arranged with fantastic art, stuck full of pins and flowers.
Two are seated and turn their back to me: one is holding the guitar,
the other singing with that soft and pretty voice;--thus seen
furtively, from behind, their pose, their hair, the nape of the neck,
all is exquisite, and I tremble lest a movement should reveal to me
faces which might destroy the enchantment. The third one is on her
feet, dancing before this areopagus of idiots, with their lanky locks
and pot hats. What a shock when she turns round! She wears over her
face the horribly grinning, deathly mask of a specter or vampire. The
mask unfastened, falls. And behold! a darling little fairy of about
twelve or fifteen years of age, slim, and already a coquette, already
a woman,--dressed in a long robe of shaded dark blue china crape,
covered with embroidery representing bats--gray bats, black bats,
golden bats.

Suddenly there are steps on the stairs, the light footsteps of
barefooted women pattering over the white mats. No doubt the first
course of my lunch just about to be served. I quickly fall back, fixed
and motionless, upon my black velvet cushion. There are three of them
now, three waiting-maids who arrive in single file, with smiles and
curtsies. One offers me the spirit-lamp and the tea-pot, another
preserved fruits in delightful little plates, the third, absolutely
indefinable objects upon gems of little trays. And they grovel before
me on the floor, placing all this plaything of a meal at my feet.

At this moment, my impressions of Japan are charming enough; I feel
myself fairly launched upon this tiny, artificial, fictitious world,
which I felt I knew already from the paintings of lacquer and
porcelains. It is so exact a representation! The three little
squatting women, graceful and dainty, with their narrow slits of eyes,
their magnificent chignons in huge bows, smooth and shining as
boot-polish, and the little tea-service on the floor, the landscape
seen through the verandah, the pagoda perched among the clouds; and
over all the same affectation everywhere, in every detail. Even the
woman's melancholy voice, still to be heard behind the paper
partition, was so evidently the way they should sing, these musicians
I had so often seen painted in amazing colors on rice-paper, half
closing their dreamy eyes in the midst of impossibly large flowers.
Long before I came to it, I had perfectly pictured this Japan to
myself. Nevertheless in the reality it almost seems to be smaller,
more finicking than I had imagined it, and also much more mournful, no
doubt by reason of that great pall of black clouds hanging over us and
this incessant rain.

       *       *       *       *       *

While awaiting M. Kangourou (who is dressing himself it appears, and
will be here shortly), it may be as well to begin lunch.

In the daintiest bowl imaginable, adorned with flights of storks, is
the most wildly impossible soup made of sea-weed. After which there
are little fish dried in sugar, crabs in sugar, beans in sugar, and
fruits in vinegar and pepper. All this is atrocious, but above all
unexpected and unimaginable. The little women make me eat, laughing
much, with that perpetual irritating laugh, which is the laugh
peculiar to Japan,--they make me eat, according to their fashion, with
dainty chop-sticks, fingered with mannered grace. I am becoming
accustomed to their faces. The whole effect is refined,--a refinement
so utterly different from our own, that at first sight I understand
nothing of it, although in the long run it may end by pleasing me.

Suddenly there enters, like a night butterfly awakened in broad
daylight, like a rare and surprising moth, the dancing-girl from the
other compartment, the child who wore the horrible mask. No doubt she
wishes to have a look at me. She rolls her eyes like a timid kitten,
and then all at once tamed, nestles against me, with a coaxing air of
childishness, which is a delightfully transparent assumption. She is
slim, elegant, delicate, and smells sweet; drolly painted, white as
plaster, with a little circle of rouge marked very precisely in the
middle of each cheek, the mouth reddened, and a touch of gilding
outlining the under lip. As they could not whiten the back of the neck
on account of all the delicate little curls of hair growing there,
they had, in their love of exactitude, stopped the white plaster in a
straight line, which might have been cut with a knife, and in
consequence at the nape appears a square of natural skin of a deep
yellow.

An imperious note sounds on the guitar, evidently a summons! Crac!
Away she goes, the little fairy, to rejoice the drivelling fools on
the other side of the screens.

Supposing I marry this one, without seeking any further. I should
respect her as a child committed to my care; I should take her for
what she is: a fantastic and charming plaything. What an amusing
little household I should set up! Really short of marrying a china
ornament, I should find it difficult to choose better.

At this moment enters M. Kangourou, clad in a suit of gray tweed,
which might have come from _La Belle Jardiniere_ or the _Pont Neuf_,
with a pot hat and white thread gloves. His countenance is at once
foolish and cunning; he has hardly a nose, hardly any eyes. He makes a
real Japanese salutation: an abrupt dip, the hands placed flat on the
knees, the body making a right angle to the legs, as if the fellow
were breaking in two; a little snake-like hissing (produced by sucking
the saliva between the teeth, and which is the expression _nec plus
ultra_ of obsequious politeness in this country). "You speak French,
M. Kangourou?"

"_ sir" (renewed bows).

He makes one for each word I utter, as if he were a mechanical toy
pulled by a string; when he is seated before me on the ground, he
limits himself to a duck of the head--always accompanied by the same
hissing noise of the saliva.

"A cup of tea, M. Kangourou?"

Fresh salute and an extra affected gesticulation with the hands, as if
to say, "I should hardly dare. It is too great a condescension on your
part. However, anything to oblige you."

       *       *       *       *       *

He guesses at the first words what I require from him.

"Of course," he replies, "we will see about it at once; in a week's
time, as it happens, a family from Simonosaki, in which there are two
charming daughters, will be here."

"What! in a week! You don't know me, M. Kangourou! No, no, either now,
to-morrow, or not at all."

Again a hissing bow, and Kangourou-San catching my agitation, begins
to pass in feverish review, all the young persons at his disposal in
Nagasaki.

"Let us see--there was Mdlle. Œillet. What a pity that I had not
spoken a few days sooner! So pretty! So clever at playing the guitar.
It is an irreparable misfortune; she was engaged only yesterday by a
Russian officer."

"Ah! Mdlle. Abricot!--Would she suit me, Mdlle. Abricot? She is the
daughter of a wealthy China merchant in the Decima Bazaar, a person of
the highest merit; but she would be very dear: her parents, who think
a great deal of her, will not let her go under a hundred yen[A] a
month. She is very accomplished, thoroughly understands commercial
writings, and has at her finger ends more than two thousand characters
of learned writing. In a poetical competition she gained the first
prize with a sonnet composed in praise of _'the blossoms of the
black-thorn hedges seen in the dew of early morning.'_ Only, she is
not very pretty: one of her eyes is smaller than the other, and she
has a hole in her cheek, resulting from an illness of her childhood."

[Footnote A: A yen is equal to four shillings.]

"Oh no! on no account that one! Let us seek amongst a less
distinguished class of young persons, but without scars. And how about
those on the other side of the screen, in those fine gold-embroidered
dresses? For instance, the dancer with the specter mask, M. Kangourou?
or again she who sings in so dulcet a strain and has such a charming
nape to her neck?"

He does not, at first, understand my drift; then when he gathers my
meaning, he shakes his head almost in a joking way, and says:

"No, sir, no! Those are only _Guéchas_,[B] sir--_Guéchas!_"

[Footnote B: _Guéchas_ are professional dancers and singers trained at
the Yeddo Conservatory.]

"Well, but why not a _Guécha_? What odds can it be to me, whether they
are _Guéchas_ or not?" Later on, no doubt, when I understand Japanese
affairs better, I shall appreciate myself the enormity of my proposal:
one would really suppose I had talked of marrying the devil.

At this point M. Kangourou suddenly calls to mind one Mdlle. Jasmin.
Heavens! how was it he did not think of her at once; she is absolutely
and exactly what I want; he will go to-morrow or this very evening, to
make the necessary overtures to the parents of this young person who
live a long way off, on the opposite hill, in the suburb of
Diou-djen-dji. She is a very pretty girl of about fifteen. She can
probably be engaged for about eighteen or twenty dollars a month, on
condition of presenting her with a few dresses of the best fashion,
and of lodging her in a pleasant and well-situated house,--all of
which a man of gallantry like myself could not fail to do.

Well, let us fix upon Mdlle. Jasmin then,--and now we must part; time
presses. M. Kangourou will come on board to-morrow to communicate to
me the result of his first proceedings and to arrange with me for the
interview. For the present he refuses to accept any remuneration; but
I am to give him my washing, and to procure him the custom of my
brother officers of the _Triomphante_. It is all settled. Profound
bows,--they put on my boots again at the door. My djin, profiting by
the interpreter kind fortune has placed in his way, begs to be
recommended to me for future custom; his stand is on the quay; his
number is 415, inscribed in French characters on the lantern of his
vehicle (we have a number 415 on board, one Le Goëlec, gunner, who
serves the left of one of my guns; happy thought, I shall remember
this); his price is sixpence the journey, or five pence an hour, for
his customers. Capital; he shall have my custom, that is promised. And
now, let us be off. The waiting-maids, who have escorted me to the
door, fall on all fours as a final salute, and remain prostrate on the
threshold--as long as I am still in sight down the dark pathway, where
the rain trickles off the great over-arching bracken upon my head.


IV.

Three days have passed. Night is closing, in an apartment which has
been mine since yesterday. Yves and I, on the first floor, move
restlessly over the white mats, striding up and down the great bare
room, of which the thin, dry flooring cracks beneath our footsteps; we
are both of us rather irritated by prolonged expectation. Yves, whose
impatience shows itself the most freely, from time to time takes a
look out of the window. As for myself, a chill suddenly seizes me, at
the idea that I have chosen, and purpose to inhabit this lonely house,
lost in the midst of the suburb of a totally strange town, perched
high on the mountain and almost opening upon the woods.

What wild notion can have taken possession of me, to settle myself in
surroundings so utterly foreign and unknown, breathing of isolation
and sadness? The waiting unnerves me, and I beguile the time by
examining all the little details of the building. The woodwork of the
ceiling is complicated and ingenious. On the partitions of white paper
which form the walls, are scattered tiny, microscopic, blue-feathered
tortoises.

"They are late," said Yves, who is still looking out into the street.

As to being late, that they certainly are, by a good hour already, and
night is falling, and the boat which should take us back to dine on
board will be gone. Probably we shall have to sup, Japanese fashion
to-night, heaven only knows where. The people of this country have no
sense of punctuality, or of the value of time.

Therefore I continue to inspect the minute and comical details of my
dwelling. Here, instead of handles such as we should have put to pull
these movable partitions, they have made little oval holes, just the
shape of a finger-end, and into which one is evidently to put one's
thumb. These little holes have a bronze ornamentation, and on looking
closely, one sees that the bronze is curiously chased: here is a lady
fanning herself; there, in the next hole, is represented a branch of
cherry in full blossom. What eccentricity there is in the taste of
this people! To bestow assiduous labor on such miniature work, and
then to hide it at the bottom of a hole to put one's finger in,
looking like a mere spot in the middle of a great white panel; to
accumulate so much patient and delicate workmanship on almost
imperceptible accessories, and all to produce an effect which is
absolutely _nil_, an effect of the most utter bareness and nudity.

Yves still continues to gaze forth, like Sister Anne. From the side on
which he leans, my verandah overlooks a street, or rather a road
bordered with houses, which climbs higher and higher, and loses itself
almost immediately in the verdure of the mountain, in the fields of
tea, the underwood and the cemeteries. As for myself, this delay
finishes by irritating me for good and all, and I turn my glances to
the opposite side: the other front of my house, also a verandah, opens
first of all upon a garden; then upon a marvelous panorama of woods
and mountains, with all the venerable Japanese quarters of Nagasaki
lying confusedly like a black ant-heap, six hundred feet below us.
This evening, in a dull twilight, notwithstanding that it is a
twilight of July, these things are melancholy. There are great clouds
heavy with rain and showers, ready to fall, traveling across the sky.
No, I cannot feel at home, in this strange dwelling I have chosen; I
feel sensations of extreme solitude and strangeness; the mere prospect
of passing the night in it gives me a shudder of horror.

"Ah! at last, brother," said Yves, "I believe,--yes, I really believe
she is coming at last."

I look over his shoulder, and I see--a back view of a little doll the
finishing touches to whose toilette are being put in the solitary
street; a last maternal glance given to the enormous bows of the sash,
the folds at the waist. Her dress is of pearl-gray silk, her _obi_
(sash) of mauve satin; a sprig of silver flowers trembles in her black
hair; a parting ray of sunlight touches the little figure; five or six
persons accompany her. Yes! it is undoubtedly Mdlle. Jasmin; they are
bringing me my _fiancée_!

I rush to the ground floor inhabited by old Madame Prune my landlady,
and her aged husband; they are absorbed in prayer before the altar of
their ancestors.

"Here they are, Madame Prune," I cry in Japanese; "here they are!
Bring at once the tea, the lamp, the embers, the little pipes for the
ladies, the little bamboo pots for spittoons! Bring us as quickly as
possible all the accessories for my reception!"

I hear the front door open, and hasten upstairs again. Wooden clogs
are deposited on the floor, the staircase creaks gently under the
little bare feet. Yves and I look at each other, with a longing to
laugh.

An old lady enters,--two old ladies,--three old ladies, emerging from
the doorway one after another with jerking and mechanical
salutations, which we return as best we can, fully conscious of our
inferiority in this particular style. Then come persons of
intermediate age,--then quite young ones, a dozen at least, friends,
neighbors, the whole quarter in fact. And the whole company, on
arriving, becomes confusedly engaged in reciprocal salutations: I
salute you,--- you salute me,--I salute you again, and you return
it,--and I re-salute you again, and I express that I shall never,
never be able to return it according to your high merit,--and I bang
my forehead against the ground, and you stick your nose between the
planks of the flooring, and there they are, on all fours one before
the other; it is a polite dispute, all anxious to yield precedence as
to sitting down, or passing first, and compliments without end are
murmured in low tones, with faces against the floor.

They seat themselves at last, smiling, in a ceremonious circle; we two
remaining standing, our eyes fixed on the staircase. And at length
emerges, in due turn, the little aigrette of silver flowers, the ebony
chignon, the gray silk robe and mauve sash of Mdlle. Jasmin, my
fiancée!

Heavens! why, I know her already! Long before setting foot in Japan, I
had met with her, on every fan, on every tea-cup--with her silly air,
her puffy little visage, her tiny eyes, mere gimlet-holes above those
expanses of impossible pink and white which are her cheeks.

She is young, that is all I can say in her favor; she is even so young
that I should almost scruple to accept her. The wish to laugh quits me
suddenly, and instead, a profound chill fastens on my heart. What!
share even an hour of my life with that little doll? Never!

The next question is, how to get out of it?

She advances smiling, with an air of repressed triumph, and behind her
looms M. Kangourou, in his suit of gray tweed. Fresh salutes, and
behold her on all fours, she too, before my landlady and before my
neighbors. Yves, the big Yves, who is not going to be married, stands
behind me, with a comical grimace, hardly repressing his
laughter,--while to give myself time to collect my ideas, I offer tea
in little cups, little spittoons and embers to the company.

Nevertheless, my discomfited air does not escape my visitors. M.
Kangourou anxiously inquires:

"How do I like her?" And I reply in a low voice, but with great
resolution:

"Not at all! I won't have that one. Never!"

I believe that this remark was almost understood in the circle around
me. Consternation was depicted on every face, the jaws dropped, the
pipes went out. And now I address my reproaches to Kangourou: "Why had
he brought her to me in such pomp, before friends and neighbors of
both sexes, instead of showing her to me discreetly as if by chance,
as I had wished? What an affront he will compel me now to put upon all
these polite persons!"

The old ladies (the mamma no doubt and aunts), prick up their ears,
and M. Kangourou translates to them, softening as much as possible, my
heartrending decision. I feel really almost sorry for them; the fact
is, that for women who, not to put too fine a point upon it, have come
to sell a child, they have an air I was not prepared for: I can hardly
say an air of _respectability_ (a word in use with us, which is
absolutely without meaning in Japan), but an air of unconscious and
good-natured simplicity; they are only accomplishing an act perfectly
admissible in their world, and really it all resembles, more than I
could have thought possible, a _bonâ fide_ marriage.

"But what fault do I find with the little girl?" asks M. Kangourou, in
consternation.

I endeavor to present the matter in the most flattering light:

"She is very young," I say; "and then she is too white, too much like
our own women. I wished for a yellow one just as a change."

"But that is only the paint they have put on her, sir! Beneath it, I
assure you, she is yellow."

Yves leans towards me and whispers:

"Look over there, brother, in that corner by the last panel; have you
noticed the one who is sitting down?"

Not I. In my annoyance I had not observed her; she had her back to the
light, was dressed in dark colors, and sat in the careless attitude of
one who keeps in the background. The fact is this one pleased me much
better. Eyes with long lashes, rather narrow, but which would have
been called good in any country in the world; almost an expression,
almost a thought. A coppery tint on her rounded cheeks; a straight
nose; slightly thick lips, but well modeled and with pretty corners.
Less young than Mdlle. Jasmin, about eighteen years of age perhaps,
already more of a woman. She wore an expression of ennui, also of a
little contempt, as if she regretted her attendance at a spectacle
which dragged so much, and was so little amusing.

"M. Kangourou, who is that young lady over there, in dark blue?"

"Over there, sir? A young lady called Mdlle. Chrysanthème. She came
with the others you see here; she is only here as a spectator. She
pleases you?" said he with eager suddenness, espying a way out of his
difficulty. Then, forgetting all his politeness, all his
ceremoniousness, all his Japanesery, he takes her by the hand, forces
her to rise, to stand in the dying daylight, to let herself be seen.
And she, who has followed our eyes and begins to guess what is on
foot, lowers her head in confusion, with a more decided but more
charming pout, and tries to step back, half sulky, half smiling.

"It makes no difference," continues M. Kangourou, "it can be arranged
just as well with this one; she is not married either, sir!"

She is not married! Then why didn't the idiot propose her to me at
once instead of the other, for whom I have a feeling of the greatest
pity, poor little soul, with her pearly gray dress, her sprig of
flowers, her expression which grows sadder, and her eyes which twinkle
like those of a child about to cry.

"It can be arranged, sir!" repeats Kangourou again, who at this moment
appears to me a go-between of the lowest type, a rascal of the meanest
kind.

Only, he adds, we, Yves and I, are in the way during the negotiations.
And, while Mdlle. Chrysanthème remains with her eyelids lowered, as
befits the occasion, while the various families, on whose countenances
may be read every degree of astonishment, every phase of expectation,
remain seated in a circle on my white mats, he sends us two into the
verandah, and we gaze down into the depths below us, upon a misty and
vague Nagasaki, a Nagasaki melting into a blue haze of darkness.

Then ensue long discourses in Japanese, arguments without end. M.
Kangourou, who is washerman and low scamp in French only, has returned
for these discussions to the long formulas of his country. From time
to time I express impatience, I ask this worthy creature whom I am
less and less able to consider in a serious light:

"Come now, tell us frankly, Kangourou, are we any nearer coming to
some arrangement? is all this ever going to end?"

"In a moment, sir, in a moment;" and he resumes his air of political
economist seriously debating social problems.

Well, one must submit to the slowness of this people. And, while the
darkness falls like a veil over the Japanese town, I have leisure to
reflect, with as much melancholy as I please, upon the bargain that is
being concluded behind me.

       *       *       *       *       *

Night has closed in, deep night; it has been necessary to light the
lamps.

It is ten o'clock when all is finally settled, and M. Kangourou comes
to tell me:

"All is arranged, sir: her parents will give her up for twenty
dollars a month,--the same price as Mdlle. Jasmin."

On hearing this, I am possessed suddenly with extreme vexation that I
should have made up my mind so quickly to link myself in ever so
fleeting and transient a manner with this little creature, and dwell
with her in this isolated house.

We come back into the room; she is the center of the circle and
seated; and they have placed the aigrette of flowers in her hair.
There is actually some expression in her glance, and I am almost
persuaded that she--this one--- thinks.

Yves is astonished at her modest attitude, at her little timid airs of
a young girl on the verge of matrimony; he had imagined nothing like
it in such a marriage as this, nor I either, I must confess.

"She is really very pretty, brother," said he; "very pretty, take my
word for it!"

These good folks, their customs, this scene, strike him dumb with
astonishment; he cannot get over it, and remains in a maze. "Oh! this
is too much," and the idea of writing a long letter to his wife at
Toulven, describing it all, diverts him greatly.

Chrysanthème and I join hands. Yves too advances and touches the
dainty little paw;--after all, if I wed her, it is chiefly his fault;
I should never have remarked her without his observation that she was
pretty. Who can tell how this strange arrangement will turn out? Is it
a woman or a doll? Well, time will show.

The families having lighted their many-colored lanterns swinging at
the ends of slight sticks, prepare to beat a retreat with many
compliments, bows and curtsies. When it is a question of descending
the stairs, no one is willing to go first, and at a given moment, the
whole party are again on all fours, motionless and murmuring polite
phrases in undertones.

_"Haul back there!"_ said Yves, laughing and employing a nautical term
used when there is a stoppage of any kind.

At length they all melt away, descend the stairs with a last buzzing
accompaniment of civilities and polite phrases finished from one step
to another in voices which gradually die away. He and I remain alone
in the unfriendly empty apartment, where the mats are still littered
with the little cups of tea, the absurd little pipes, and the
miniature trays.

"Let us watch them go away!" said Yves, leaning out. At the door of
the garden is a renewal of the same salutations and curtsies, and
then the two groups of women separate, their bedaubed paper lanterns
fade away trembling in the distance, balanced at the extremity of
flexible canes which they hold in their finger-tips, as one would hold
a fishing-rod in the dark to catch night-birds. The procession of the
unfortunate Mdlle. Jasmin mounts upwards, towards the mountain, while
that of Mdlle. Chrysanthème winds downwards by a narrow old street,
half stairway, half goat-path, which leads to the town.

Then we also depart. The night is fresh, silent, exquisite, the
eternal song of the cicalas fills the air. We can still see the red
lanterns of my new family, dwindling away in the distance, as they
descend and gradually become lost in that yawning abyss, at the bottom
of which lies Nagasaki.

Our way, too, lies downwards, but on an opposite slope by steep paths
leading to the sea.

And when I find myself once more on board, when the scene enacted on
the hill up above recurs to my mind, it seems to me that my betrothal
is a joke, and my new family a set of puppets.




V.


_July 10th, 1885_.

It is three days now since my marriage was an accomplished fact.

In the lower part of the town, in the middle of one of the new
cosmopolitan districts, in the ugly pretentious building which is a
kind of register office, the deed has been signed and countersigned,
with marvelous hieroglyphics, in a large book, in the presence of
those ridiculous little creatures, formerly silken-robed _Samouraï_,
but now called policemen, and dressed up in tight jackets and Russian
caps.

The ceremony took place in the full heat of mid-day; Chrysanthème and
her mother arrived there together, and I went alone. We seemed to have
met for the purpose of ratifying some discreditable contract, and the
two women trembled in the presence of these ugly little individuals,
who, in their eyes, were the personification of the law.

In the middle of their official scrawl, they made me write in French
my name, Christian name, and profession. Then they gave me an
extraordinary document on a sheet of rice-paper, which set forth the
permission granted me by the civilian Authorities of the Island of
Kiu-Siu, to inhabit a house situated in the suburb of Diou-djen-dji,
with a person called Chrysanthème, the said permission being available
under protection of the police, during the whole of my stay in Japan.

In the evening, however, up there in our own quarter, our little
marriage became a very pretty affair,--a procession carrying lanterns,
a festive tea and some music. It was indeed high time.

Now we are almost an old married couple, and we are gently settling
down into every-day habits.

Chrysanthème tends the flowers in our bronze vases, dresses herself
with studied care, proud of her socks with the divided big toe, and
strums all day on a kind of long-necked guitar, producing therefrom
plaintive and sad sounds.




VI.


In our home, all has the appearance of a Japanese picture: we have
nothing but little folding-screens, little curiously shaped stools
bearing vases full of nosegays, and at the further end of the
apartment, in a nook forming an altar, a large gilded Buddha sits
enthroned in a lotus.

The house is just as I had fancied it should be in the many dreams of
Japan I had made before my arrival, during my long night watches:
perched on high, in a peaceful suburb, in the midst of green
gardens;--made up of paper panels, and taken to pieces according to
one's fancy, like a child's toy. Whole families of cicalas chirp day
and night under our old resounding roof. From our verandah, we have a
bewildering bird's-eye view of Nagasaki, of its streets, its junks and
its great pagodas, which, at certain hours, is lit up at our feet like
some fairylike scene.




VII.


As a mere outline, little Chrysanthème has been seen everywhere and by
everybody. Whoever has looked at one of those paintings on china or on
silk that now fill our bazaars, knows by heart the pretty stiff
head-dress, the leaning figure, ever ready to try some new gracious
salutation, the scarf fastened behind in an enormous bow, the large
falling sleeves, the dress slightly clinging about the ankles with a
little crooked train like a lizard's tail.

But her face, no, every one has not seen it; there is something
special about it.

Moreover, the type of women the Japanese paint mostly on their vases
is an exceptional one in their country. It is almost exclusively among
the nobility that these personages are found with their long pale
faces, painted in tender rose-tints, and silly long necks which give
them the appearance of storks. This distinguished type (which I am
obliged to admit was also Mdlle. Jasmin's) is rare, particularly at
Nagasaki.

In the middle class and the people, the ugliness is more pleasant and
sometimes becomes a kind of prettiness. The eyes are still too small
and hardly able to open, but the faces are rounder, browner, more
vivacious; and in the women there remains a certain vagueness in the
features, something childlike which prevails to the very end of their
lives.

They are so laughing, so merry, all these little Niponese dolls!
Rather a forced mirth, it is true, studied and at times with a false
ring in it; nevertheless one is attracted by it.

Chrysanthème is an exception, for she is melancholy. What thoughts can
be running through that little brain? My knowledge of her language is
still too restricted to enable me to find out. Moreover, it is a
hundred to one that she has no thoughts whatever. And even if she
had, what do I care?

I have chosen her to amuse me, and I would really rather she should
have one of those insignificant little thoughtless faces like all the
others.




VIII.


When night closes in, we light two hanging lamps of a religious
character, which burn till morn, before our gilded idol.

We sleep on the floor, on a thin cotton mattress, which is unfolded
and laid out over our white mats. Chrysanthème's pillow is a little
wooden block, scooped out to fit exactly the nape of the neck, without
disturbing the elaborate head-dress, which must never be taken down;
the pretty black hair I shall probably never see undone. My pillow, a
Chinese model, is a kind of little square drum covered over with
serpent skin.

We sleep under a gauze mosquito net of somber greenish blue, dark as
the shades of night, stretched out on an orange-colored ribbon. (These
are the traditional colors, and all the respectable families of
Nagaski possess a similar gauze.) It envelops us like a tent; the
mosquitoes and the night-moths dance around it.

       *       *       *       *       *

This sounds very pretty, and written down looks very well. In reality,
however, it is not so; something, I know not what, is wanting, and it
is all very paltry. In other lands, in the delightful isles of
Oceania, in the old lifeless quarters of Stamboul, it seemed as if
mere words could never express all I felt, and I vainly struggled
against my own incompetence to render, in human language, the
penetrating charm surrounding me.

Here, on the contrary, words exact and truthful in themselves seem
always too thrilling, too great for the subject; seem to embellish it
unduly. I feel as if I were acting, for my own benefit, some
wretchedly trivial and third-rate comedy; and whenever I try to
consider my home in a serious spirit, the scoffing figure of M.
Kangourou rises up before me, the matrimonial agent, to whom I am
indebted for my happiness.




IX.


_July 12th_.

Yves comes up to us whenever he is free, in the evening at five
o'clock, after his work on board.

He is our only European visitor, and with the exception of a few
civilities and cups of tea, exchanged with our neighbors, we lead a
very retired life. Only in the evenings, winding our way through the
precipitous little streets and carrying our lanterns at the end of
short sticks, we go down to Nagasaki in search of amusement at the
theaters, at the "tea-houses," or in the bazaars.

Yves treats this wife of mine as if she were a plaything, and
continually assures me that she is charming.

Myself, I find her as exasperating as the cicalas on my roof; and when
I am alone at home, side by side with this little creature twanging
the strings of her long-necked guitar, in front of this marvelous
panorama of pagodas and mountains,--I am overcome by a sadness full of
tears.




X.


_July 13th_.

Last night, as we lay under the Japanese roof of Diou-djen-dji,--under
the thin and ancient wooden roof scorched by a hundred years of
sunshine, vibrating at the least sound, like the stretched-out
parchment of a tamtam,--in the silence which prevails at two o'clock
in the morning, we heard overhead a regular wild huntsman's chase
passing at full gallop:

"Nidzoumi!" ("the mice!"), said Chrysanthème.

Suddenly, the word brings back to my mind yet another, spoken in a
very different language, in a country far away from here: "Setchan!" a
word heard elsewhere, a word that has likewise been whispered in my
ear by a woman's voice, under similar circumstances, in a moment of
nocturnal terror--"Setchan!" It was during one of our first nights at
Stamboul spent under the mysterious roof of Eyoub, when danger
surrounded us on all sides; a noise on the steps of the black
staircase had made us tremble, and she also, my dear little Turkish
companion, had said to me in her beloved language, "Setchan!" ("the
mice!").

At that fond recollection, a thrill of sweet memories coursed through
my veins; it was as though I had been startled out of a long ten
years' sleep; I looked down upon the doll beside me with a sort of
hatred, wondering why I was there, and I arose, with almost a feeling
of remorse, to escape from that blue gauze net.

I stepped out upon the verandah, and there I paused, gazing into the
depths of the starlit night. Beneath me Nagasaki lay asleep, wrapt in
a soft light slumber, hushed by the murmuring sound of a thousand
insects in the moonlight, and fairylike with its roseate hues. Then,
turning my head, I saw behind me the gilded idol with our lamps
burning in front of it; the idol smiling its impassive Buddha smile;
and its presence seemed to cast around it something, I know not what,
strange and incomprehensible. Never until now had I slept under the
eye of such a god.

In the midst of the calm and silence of the night, I strove to recall
my poignant impressions of Stamboul; but alas, I strove in vain, they
would not return to me in this strange, far-off world. Through the
transparent blue gauze appeared my little Japanese, as she lay in her
somber night-dress with all the fantastic grace of her country, the
nape of her neck resting on its wooden block, and her hair arranged in
large shiny bows. Her amber-colored arms, pretty and delicate,
emerged, bare up to the shoulders, from her wide sleeves.

"What can those mice on the roof have done to him?" thought
Chrysanthème. Of course she could not understand. In a coaxing manner,
like a playful kitten, she glanced at me with her half-closed eyes,
inquiring why I did not come back to sleep,--and I returned to my
place by her side.




XI.


_July 14th_.

It is the National Fête day of France. In Nagasaki roadstead, all the
ships are dressed out with flags, and salutes are firing in our honor.

Alas! All day long, I cannot help thinking of that last fourteenth of
July, spent in the deep calm and stillness of my old home, the door
closed to all intruders, while the gay crowd roared outside; there I
had remained till evening, seated on a bench, shaded by a trellis
covered with honeysuckle, where in the bye-gone days of my childhood's
summers, I used to settle myself with my copybooks and pretend to
learn my lessons. Oh! those days when I was supposed to learn my
lessons: how my thoughts used to rove,--what voyages, what distant
lands, what tropical forests did I not behold in my dreams! At that
time, near the garden bench, in some of the crevices in the stone
wall, there dwelt many a big ugly black spider ever on the watch,
peeping out of his nook ready to pounce upon any giddy fly or
wandering centipede. One of my amusements consisted in tickling the
spiders gently, very gently, with a blade of grass or a cherry stalk
in their holes. Mystified, they would rush out, fancying they had to
deal with some sort of prey, whilst I would rapidly draw back my hand
in disgust. Well, last year, on that fourteenth of July, as I recalled
my days of Latin themes and translations, now forever flown, and this
game of boyish days, I actually recognized the very same spiders (or
at least their daughters), lying in wait in the very same holes.
Gazing at them and at the tufts of grass and moss around me, a
thousand memories of those summers of my early life welled up within
me, memories which for years past had lain slumbering under this old
wall, sheltered by the ivy boughs. While all that is ourselves
perpetually changes and passes away, the constancy with which Nature
repeats, always in the same manner, her most infinitesimal details,
seems a wonderful mystery; the same peculiar species of moss grow
afresh for centuries on precisely the same spot, and the same little
insects each summer do the same thing in the same place.

       *       *       *       *       *

I must admit that this episode of my childhood and the spiders, have
little to do with the story of Chrysanthème. But an incongruous
interruption is quite in keeping with the taste of this country;
everywhere it is practiced, in conversation, in music, even in
painting; a landscape painter, for instance, when he has finished a
picture of mountains and crags, will not hesitate to draw in the very
middle of the sky a circle, or a lozenge, or some kind of framework,
within which he will represent anything incoherent and inappropriate:
a bonze fanning himself, or a lady taking a cup of tea. Nothing is
more thoroughly Japanese than such digressions made without the
slightest àpropos.

Moreover, if I roused my past memories, it was the better to force
myself to notice the difference between that 14th of July last year,
so peacefully spent amidst surroundings familiar to me from my
earliest infancy, and the present animated one, passed in the midst of
such a novel world.

To-day, therefore, under the scorching mid-day sun, at two o'clock,
three quick-footed djins dragged us at full speed,--Yves, Chrysanthème
and myself,--in Indian file, each in a little jolting cart, to the
further end of Nagasaki, and there deposited us at the foot of some
gigantic steps that run straight up into the mountain.

These are the granite steps leading to the great temple of Osueva;
wide enough to give access to a whole regiment; they are as grand and
imposing as any work of Babylon or Nineveh, and in complete contrast
with all the finical surroundings.

We climb up and up,--Chrysanthème listlessly, affecting fatigue, under
her paper parasol painted with pink butterflies on a black ground. As
we ascended, we passed under enormous monastic porticos, also in
granite of rude and primitive style. In truth, these steps and these
temple porticos are the only imposing works that this people has
created, and they astonish, for they scarcely seem Japanese.

We climb up still higher. At this sultry hour of the day, from top to
bottom of the immense gray steps, only we three are to be seen; on all
that granite there are but the pink butterflies on Chrysanthème's
parasol, to throw a cheerful and brilliant note.

We passed through the first temple yard, in which are a couple of
white china turrets, bronze lanterns, and the statue of a large horse
in jade. Then without pausing at the sanctuary, we turned to the left,
and entered a shady garden, which formed a terrace halfway up the
hill, and at the extremity of which was situated the
_Donko-Tchaya_,--in English: _the tea-house of the Toads_.

It was here that Chrysanthème was taking us. We sat down at a table,
under a black linen tent, decorated with large white letters (of
funereal aspect), and two laughing _mousmés_ hurried up to wait upon
us.

The word _mousmé_ means a young girl, or very young woman. It is one
of the prettiest words in the Niponese language; it seems almost as if
there were a little _moue_[C] in the very sound, and as if a pretty
taking little pout such as they put on, and also a little pert
physiognomy, were described by it. I shall often make use of it,
knowing none other in our own language that conveys the same meaning.

[Footnote C: _Moue_ means "pout" in French.]

Some Japanese Watteau must have mapped out this _Donko-Tchaya_, for it
has rather an affected air of rurality, though very pretty. Well
shaded, under a thick vault of large trees densely foliaged, a
miniature lake hard by, the chosen residence of a few toads, has given
it its attractive denomination. Lucky toads, who crawl and croak on
the finest of moss, in the midst of tiny artificial islets decked with
gardenias in full bloom. From time to time, one of them informs us of
his thoughts by a "Couac," uttered in a deep bass croak infinitely
more hollow than that of our own toads.

       *       *       *       *       *

Under the tent of this tea-house, we are as it were on a balcony
jutting out from the mountain side, overhanging from on high the
grayish town and its suburbs buried in greenery. Around, above and
beneath us cling and hang on every possible point, clumps of trees and
fresh green woods, with the delicate and varying foliage of the
temperate zone. Then we can see, at our feet, the deep roadstead,
fore-shortened and slanting, diminished in appearance till it looks
like a terrible somber tear in the mass of large green mountains; and
further still, quite low down, on the waters which seem black and
stagnant, are to be seen, very tiny and overwhelmed, the men-of-war,
the steamboats and the junks, flags flying from every mast. On the
dark green, which is the dominant shade around, stand out these
thousand scraps of bunting, emblems of the different nationalities,
all displayed, all flying in honor of far-distant France. The colors
most prevailing in this motley assemblage are the white flag with a
red ball, emblem of the _Empire of the Rising Sun_, where we now are.

       *       *       *       *       *

With the exception of three or four mousmés at the further end who are
practicing with bows and arrows, we are to-day the only people in the
garden, and the mountain round about is silent.

Having finished her cigarette and her cup of tea, Chrysanthème also
wishes to exert her skill; for archery is still held in honor among
the young women. The old man who keeps the range, picks out for her
his best arrows tipped with white and red feathers,--and she takes aim
with a serious air. The mark is a circle, traced in the middle of a
picture on which is painted in flat gray tones, terrifying chimera
flying through the clouds.

Chrysanthème is certainly an adroit markswoman, and we admire her as
much as she expected.

Then Yves, who is usually clever at all games of skill, wishes to try
his luck, and fails. It is amusing to see her, with her mincing ways
and smiles, arrange with the tips of her little fingers, the sailor's
broad hands, placing them on the bow and the string in order to teach
him the proper manner. Never have they seemed to get on so well
together, Yves and my dolly, and I might even feel anxious, were I
less sure of my good brother, and if, moreover, it were not a matter
of perfect indifference to me.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the stillness of the garden, mid the balmy peacefulness of these
mountains, a loud noise suddenly startles us; a unique, powerful,
terrible sound, which is prolonged in infinite metallic vibrations. It
begins again sounding more appalling: _Boum!_ borne to us by the
rising wind.

"_Nippon Kané!_" explains Chrysanthème,--and she again takes up her
brightly-feathered arrows. "_Nippon Kané_ (the Japanese brass); it is
the Japanese brass that is sounding!" It is the monstrous gong of a
monastery, situated in a suburb beneath us. Well, it is powerful
indeed "the Japanese brass!" When the strokes are ended, when it is no
longer heard, a vibration seems to linger among the suspended foliage,
and an endless quiver runs through the air.

       *       *       *       *       *

I am obliged to admit that Chrysanthème looks very charming shooting
her arrows, her figure well bent back the better to bend her bow; her
loose-hanging sleeves caught up to her shoulders, showing the graceful
bare arms polished like amber and very much of the same color. Each
arrow whistles by with the rustle of a bird's wing,--then a short
sharp little blow is heard, the target is hit, always.

At nightfall, when Chrysanthème has gone up to Diou-djen-dji, we
cross, Yves and myself, the European concession, on our way to the
ship, to take up our watch till the following day. The cosmopolitan
quarter exhaling an odor of absinthe, is dressed up with flags, and
squibs are being fired off in honor of France. Long lines of djins
pass by, dragging as fast as their naked legs can carry them, the crew
of the _Triomphante_, who are shouting and fanning themselves. The
"Marseillaise" is heard everywhere; English sailors are singing it,
gutturally with a dull and slow cadence like their own "God Save." In
all the American bars, grinding organs are hammering it with many an
odious variation and flourish, in order to attract our men.

       *       *       *       *       *

Just one funny recollection comes back to me of that evening. On our
return, we had by mistake got into a street inhabited by a multitude
of ladies of doubtful reputation. I can still see that big fellow
Yves, struggling with a whole band of tiny little mousmés of some
twelve or fifteen years of age, who barely reached up to his waist,
and were pulling him by the sleeves, anxious to lead him astray.
Astonished and indignant he repeated as he extricated himself from
their clutches: "Oh, this is too much!" So shocked was he at seeing
such mere babies, so young, so tiny, already so brazen and shameless.




XII.


_July 18th_.

There are now four of us, four officers of my ship, married like
myself, and inhabiting the slopes of the same suburb. It is quite an
ordinary occurrence, and is arranged without difficulties, mystery or
danger, through the negotiations of the same M. Kangourou.

As a matter of course, we are on visiting terms with all these ladies.

First there is our very merry neighbor Madame Campanule, who is little
Charles N----'s wife; then Madame Jonquille, who is even merrier than
Campanule, like a young bird and the daintiest fairy of the whole lot:
she has married X----, a fair northerner who adores her; they are a
loverlike and inseparable pair, the only one that will probably weep
when the hour of parting comes. Then Sikou-San with Doctor Y----; and
lastly the midshipman Z---- with the tiny Madame Touki-San, no taller
than a boot: thirteen years old at the outside and already a regular
woman, full of her own importance, a petulant little gossip. In my
childhood, I was sometimes taken to the _Learned Animals_ Theater, and
I remember a certain Madame de Pompadour, a principal rôle, filled by
a gayly dressed-up old monkey; Touki-San reminds me of her.

In the evening, all these folk generally come and fetch us for a long
processional walk with lighted lanterns. My wife, more serious, more
melancholy, perhaps even more refined, and belonging, I fancy, to a
higher class, tries when these friends come to us to play the part of
the lady of the house. It is comical to see the entry of these
ill-matched couples, partners for a day, the ladies with their
disjointed bows falling on all fours before Chrysanthème, the queen of
the establishment. When we are all assembled, we start off, arm in
arm, one behind the other, and always carrying at the end of our short
sticks little white or red paper lanterns;--it seems it is pretty.

We are obliged to scramble down the kind of street, or rather
goat's-path, which leads to the Japanese Nagasaki,--with the prospect,
alas! of having to climb up again at night; clamber up all the steps,
all the slippery slopes, stumble over all the stones, before we shall
be able to get home, go to bed, and sleep. We make our descent in the
darkness, under the branches, under the foliage, betwixt dark gardens
and venerable little houses that throw but a faint glimmer on the
road; and when the moon is absent or clouded over, our lanterns are
by no means unnecessary.

When at last we reach the bottom, suddenly, without transition, we
find ourselves in the very heart of Nagasaki and its busy throng in a
long illuminated street, where vociferating djins hurry along and
thousands of paper lanterns swing and gleam in the wind. It is life
and animation, after the peace of our silent suburb.

Here, decorum requires we should separate from our wives. All five
take hold of each others' hands, like a batch of little girls out
walking. We follow them with an air of indifference. Seen from behind,
our dolls are really very dainty, with their back hair so tidily done
up, their tortoiseshell pins so coquettishly arranged. They shuffle
along, their high wooden clogs making an ugly sound, striving to walk
with their toes turned in, according to the height of fashion and
elegance. At every minute they burst out laughing.

Yes, seen from behind, they are very pretty; they have, like all
Japanese women, the most lovely turn of the head. Moreover, they are
very funny, thus drawn up in line. In speaking of them, we say: "Our
little dancing dogs," and in truth they are singularly like them.

This great Nagasaki is the same from one end to another, with its
numberless petroleum lamps burning, its many-colored lanterns
flickering, and innumerable panting djins. Always the same narrow
streets, lined on each side with the same low houses, built in paper
and wood. Always the same shops, without glass windows, open to all
the winds, equally rudimentary whatever may be sold or made in them;
whether they display the finest gold lacquer ware, the most marvelous
china jars, or old worn-out pots and pans, dried fish, and ragged
frippery. All the salesmen are seated on the ground in the midst of
their valuable or trumpery merchandise, their legs bared nearly to the
waist. And all kinds of queer little trades are carried on under the
public gaze, by strangely primitive means, by workmen of the most
ingenuous type.

Oh! what wonderful goods are exposed for sale in those streets! what
whimsical extravagances in those bazaars!

No horses, no carriages are ever seen in the town; nothing but people
on foot, or the comical little carts dragged along by the runners.
Some few Europeans straggling hither and thither, wanderers from the
ships in harbor; some Japanese (fortunately as yet but few in number)
dressed up in coats; other natives who content themselves with adding
to their national costume the pot hat, from which their long sleek
locks hang down; and all around, eager haggling, bargaining,--and
laughter.

In the bazaars every evening our mousmés make endless purchases; like
spoilt children they buy everything they fancy: toys, pins, ribbons,
flowers. And then they prettily offer each other presents, with
childish little smiles. For instance, Campanule buys for Chrysanthème
an ingeniously contrived lantern on which, set in motion by some
invisible machinery, Chinese shadows dance in a ring round the flame.
In return, Chrysanthème gives Campanule a magic fan, with paintings
that change at will from butterflies fluttering round cherry-blossoms,
to outlandish monsters pursuing each other across black clouds. Touki
offers Sikou a cardboard mask representing the bloated countenance of
Daï-Cok, god of wealth; and Sikou replies by a long crystal trumpet,
by means of which are produced the most extraordinary sounds, like a
turkey gobbling. Everything is uncouth, fantastical to excess,
grotesquely lugubrious; everywhere we are surprised by
incomprehensible conceptions, which seem the work of distorted
imaginations.

In the fashionable tea-houses where we finish up our evenings, the
little servant-girls now bow to us, on our arrival, with an air of
respectful recognition, as belonging to the fast set of Nagasaki.
There we carry on desultory conversations, full of misunderstandings
and endless _quid pro quo's_ of uncouth words,--in little gardens
lighted up with lanterns, near ponds full of gold fish, with little
bridges, little islets and little ruined towers. They hand us tea and
white and pink-colored sweetmeats flavored with pepper that taste
strange and unfamiliar, and beverages mixed with snow tasting of
flowers or perfumes.

       *       *       *       *       *

To give a faithful account of those evenings, would require a more
affected style than our own; and some kind of graphic sign would have
also to be expressly invented and scattered at haphazard amongst the
words, indicating the moment at which the reader should laugh,--rather
a forced laugh, perhaps, but amiable and gracious. The evening at an
end; it is time to return up there.

Oh! that street, that road, that we must clamber up every evening,
under the starlit sky, or the heavy thunder-clouds, dragging by the
hand our drowsy mousmé in order to regain our home perched on high
half-way up the hill, where our bed of matting awaits us.




XIII.


The cleverest amongst us has been Louis de S----. Having formerly
inhabited Japan, and made a marriage Japan fashion there, he is now
satisfied to remain the friend of our wives, of whom he has become the
_Komodachi taksan takaï, the very tall friend_ (as they say on account
of his excessive height and slenderness). Talking Japanese more freely
than we can, he is their confidential adviser, disturbs or reconciles
at will our households, and has infinite amusement at our expense.

This _very tall friend_ of our wives enjoys all the fun that these
little creatures can give him, without any of the worries of domestic
life. With brother Yves, and little Oyouki (the daughter of Madame
Prune, my landlady,) he makes up our incongruous party.




XIV.


M. Sucre and Madame Prune,[D] my landlord and wife, two perfectly
unique personages but recently escaped from the panel of some screen,
live below us on the ground floor; and very old they seem to have this
daughter of fifteen, Oyouki, who is Chrysanthème's inseparable friend.

[Footnote D: In Japanese: _Sato-san_ and _Oumé-San_.]

Both of them are entirely absorbed in the practices of Shintoist
devotion: perpetually on their knees before their family altar,
perpetually occupied in murmuring their lengthy orisons to the
Spirits, and clapping their hands from time to time to recall around
them the inattentive essences floating in the atmosphere;--in their
spare moments they cultivate in little pots of gayly-painted
earthenware, dwarf shrubs and unheard-of flowers which smell
deliciously in the evening.

M. Sucre is taciturn, dislikes society, looks like a mummy in his blue
cotton dress. He writes a great deal, (his memoirs, I fancy) with a
paint-brush held in his finger-tips, on long strips of rice-paper of a
faint gray tint.

Madame Prune is eagerly attentive, obsequious and rapacious; her
eye-brows are closely shaven, her teeth carefully lacquered with black
as befits a lady of gentility, and at all and no matter what hours,
she appears on all fours at the entrance of our apartment, to offer us
her services.

As to Oyouki, she rushes upon us ten times a day,--whether we are
sleeping, or dressing,--like a whirlwind on a visit, flashing upon us,
a very gust of dainty youthfulness and droll gayety,--a living peal of
laughter. She is round of figure, round of face; half baby, half girl;
and so affectionate that she bestows kisses on the slightest occasion
with her great puffy lips,--a little moist, it is true, like a
child's, but nevertheless very fresh and very red.




XV.


In our dwelling, open as it is all the night through, the lamps
burning before the gilded Buddha procure us the company of the insect
inhabitants of every garden in the neighborhood. Moths, mosquitoes,
cicalas, and other extraordinary insects of which I don't even know
the names,--all this company assembles around us.

It is extremely funny, when some unexpected grasshopper, some
free-and-easy beetle presents itself without invitation or excuse,
scampering over our white mats, to see the manner in which
Chrysanthème indicates it to my righteous vengeance,--merely pointing
her finger at it, without another word than "Hou!" said with bent
head, a particular pout, and a scandalized air.

There is a fan kept expressly for the purpose of blowing them out of
doors again.




XVI.


Here, I must own, that to the reader of my story it must appear to
drag a little.

In default of exciting intrigues and tragic adventures, I would fain
have known how to infuse into it a little of the sweet perfumes of the
gardens which surround me, something of the gentle warmth of the
sunshine, of the shade of these graceful trees. Love being wanting, I
should like it to breathe of the restful tranquillity of this far-away
suburb. Then, too, I should like it to reëcho the sound of
Chrysanthème's guitar, in which I begin to find a certain charm, for
want of something better, in the silence of the lovely summer
evenings.

All through these moonlit nights of July, the weather has been calm,
luminous and magnificent. Ah! what glorious clear nights, what
exquisite roseate tints beneath that wonderful moon, what mystery of
blue shadows in the thick tangle of trees. And, from the heights
where stood our verandah, how prettily the town lay sleeping at our
feet!

After all, I do not positively detest this little Chrysanthème, and
when there is no repugnance on either side, habit turns into a
make-shift of attachment.




XVII.


Always, over, in, and through everything, rises day and night from
this Japanese landscape the song of the cicalas, ceaseless, strident,
and prodigious. It is everywhere, and never-ending, at no matter what
hour of the burning day, what hour of the cool and refreshing night.
In the midst of the roads, as we approached our anchorage, we had
heard it at the same time from the two shores, from both walls of
green mountains. It is wearisome and haunting; it seems to be the
manifestation, the noise expressive of the special kind of life
peculiar to this region of the world. It is the voice of summer in
these islands; it is the song of unconscious rejoicing, always content
with itself and always appearing to inflate, to rise upwards, in a
greater and greater exultation at the sheer happiness of living.

It is to me the noise characteristic of this country,--this, and the
cry of the falcon, which had in like manner greeted our entry into
Japan. Over the valleys and the deep bay sail these birds, uttering
from time to time their three cries, "Han! han! han!" in a key of
sadness, which seems the extreme of painful astonishment. And the
mountains around re-echo their cry.




XVIII.


Yves, Chrysanthème, and little Oyouki have struck up a friendship so
great that it amuses me: I even think, that in my home life, this
intimacy is what affords me the greatest entertainment. They form a
contrast which gives rise to the most absurd jokes, and most
unforeseen situations. He brings into this fragile little paper house,
his sailor's freedom and ease of manner, and his Breton accent; side
by side with these tiny mousmés of affected manners and bird-like
voices, who, small as they are, rule the big fellow as they please;
make him eat with chopsticks; teach him Japanese "_pigeon-vole_,"--and
cheat him, and quarrel, and almost die of laughter over it all.

Certainly he and Chrysanthème take a pleasure in each other's company.
But I remain serenely undisturbed, and cannot imagine that this
little chance doll with whom I play at married life, could possibly
bring a serious trouble between this "brother" and myself.




XIX.


My family of Japanese relations, very numerous and very conspicuous,
is a great source of diversion to those of my brother officers who
visit me in my villa on the hill,--most especially to _komodachi
taksan takaï (the immensely tall friend)_.

I have a charming mother-in-law--quite a woman of the world,--little
sisters-in-law, little cousins, and aunts who are still quite young.

I have even a poor cousin, twice removed, who is a djin. There was
some hesitation in owning this latter to me; but, behold! during the
ceremony of introduction, we exchanged a smile of recognition, it was
number 415.

Over this poor 415, my friends on board crack no end of jokes,--one in
particular, who, less than any one has the right to make them, little
Charles N----, for his mother-in-law was once a porter, or something
of the kind, at the gateway of a pagoda.

I, however, who have a great respect for strength and agility, much
appreciate this new relative of mine. His legs are undoubtedly the
best in all Nagasaki, and whenever I am in a hurry, I always beg
Madame Prune to send down to the djin stand, and engage my cousin.




XX.


I arrived unexpectedly to-day at Diou-djen-dji, in the midst of a
burning noonday heat. At the foot of the stairs lay Chrysanthème's
wooden clogs and her sandals of varnished leather.

In our rooms, up above, all was open to the air; bamboo blinds lowered
on the sunny side, and through their transparency came warm air and
golden threads of light. To-day, the flowers Chrysanthème had placed
in our bronze vases were lotus, and my eyes fell, as I entered, upon
their great rosy cups.

According to her usual custom, she was lying flat on the floor
enjoying her daily siesta.

What a singular originality these bouquets of Chrysanthème always
have: a something difficult to define, a Japanese slimness, a
mannered grace which we should never succeed in imparting to them.

She was sleeping flat on her face upon the mats, her high headdress
and tortoiseshell pins standing out boldly from the rest of the
horizontal figure. The train of her tunic prolonged her delicate
little body, like the tail of a bird; her arms were stretched
crosswise, the sleeves spread out like wings,--and her long guitar lay
beside her.

She looked like a dead fairy; or still more did she resemble some
great blue dragon-fly, which, having alighted on that spot, some
unkind hand had pinned to the floor.

Madame Prune, who had come upstairs after me, always officious and
eager, manifested by her gestures her sentiments of indignation on
beholding the careless reception accorded by Chrysanthème to her lord
and master, and advanced to wake her.

"Pray do nothing of the kind, my good Madame Prune, you don't know how
much I prefer her like that!" I had left my shoes below, according to
custom, by the side of the little clogs and sandals; and I entered on
the tips of my toes, very, very softly, to go and sit awhile under the
verandah.

What a pity this little Chrysanthème cannot always be asleep; she is
really extremely decorative seen in this manner,--and like this, at
least, she does not bore me. Who knows what may perchance be going on
in that little head and heart! If I only had the means of finding out!
But strange to say, since we have kept house together, instead of
pushing my studies in the Japanese language further, I have neglected
them, so much have I felt the utter impossibility of ever interesting
myself in the subject.

Seated under my verandah, my eyes wandered over the temples and
cemeteries spread at my feet, over the woods and green mountains, over
Nagasaki lying bathed in the sunlight. The cicalas were chirping their
loudest, the strident noise trembling feverishly in the hot air. All
was calm, full of light and full of heat.

Nevertheless, to my taste, it is not yet enough so! What then can have
changed upon the earth? The burning noon-days of summer, such as I can
recall in days gone by, were more brilliant, more full of sunshine;
Nature seemed to me in those days more powerful, more terrible. One
would say this was only a pale copy of all that I knew in early
years,--a copy in which something is wanting. Sadly do I ask
myself,--Is the splendor of the summer only this? _was it_ only this?
or is it the fault of my eyes, and as time goes on shall I behold
everything around me paling still more?

Behind me a faint and melancholy strain of music,--melancholy enough
to make one shiver,--and shrill, shrill as the song of the
grasshoppers, began to make itself heard, very softly at first, then
growing louder and rising in the silence of the noonday like the
diminutive wail of some poor Japanese soul in pain and anguish; it was
Chrysanthème and her guitar awaking together.

It pleased me that the idea should have occurred to her to greet me
with music, instead of eagerly hastening to wish me "Good morning."
(At no time have I ever given myself the trouble to pretend the
slightest affection for her, and a certain coldness even has grown up
between us, especially when we are alone.) But to-day I turn to her
with a smile, and wave my hand for her to continue. "Go on, it amuses
me to listen to your quaint little impromptu." It is singular that the
music of this essentially merry people should be so plaintive. But
undoubtedly that which Chrysanthème is playing at this moment is worth
listening to. Whence can it have come to her? What unutterable dreams,
forever hidden from me, fly through her yellow head, when she plays or
sings in this manner?

Suddenly: Pan, pan, pan! Some one knocks three times, with a harsh
and bony finger against one of the steps of our stairs, and in the
aperture of our doorway appears an idiot, clad in a suit of gray
tweed, who bows low. "Come in, come in, M. Kangourou. How well you
come, just in the nick of time! I was actually becoming enthusiastic
over your country!"

It was a little washing bill, which M. Kangourou respectfully wished
to hand to me, with a profound bend of the whole body, the correct
pose of the hands on the knees, and a long snake-like hiss.




XXI.


Following the road which climbs past the front of our dwelling, one
passes a dozen or more old villas, a few garden walls, and then there
is nothing but the lonely mountain side, with little paths winding
upwards towards the summit through plantations of tea, bushes of
camellias, underwood and rocks. The mountains round Nagasaki are
covered with cemeteries; for centuries and centuries past it is up
here they have brought their dead.

But there is neither sadness nor horror in these Japanese sepulchers;
it would seem as if among this frivolous and childish people, death
itself could not be taken seriously. The monuments are either Buddhas,
in granite, seated on lotus, or upright funereal stones with an
inscription in gold; they are grouped together in little enclosures in
the midst of the woods, or on natural terraces delightfully situated,
and are generally reached by long stairways of stone carpeted with
moss; from time to time, these pass under one of the sacred gateways,
of which the shape, always the same, rude and simple, is a smaller
reproduction of those in the temples.

Up above us, the tombs of our mountain are of so hoary an antiquity
that they no longer alarm any one, even by night. It is a region of
forsaken cemeteries. The dead hidden away there have long since become
one with the earth around them; and these thousands of little gray
stones, these multitudes of ancient little Buddhas, eaten away by
lichens, seem to be now no more than a proof of a series of
existences, long anterior to our own, and lost forever and altogether
in the mysterious depths of ages.




XXII.


Chrysanthème's meals are something indescribable.

She begins in the morning, when she wakes, by two little green wild
plums pickled in vinegar and rolled in powdered sugar. A cup of tea
completes this almost traditional breakfast of Japan, the very same
Madame Prune is eating downstairs, the same served up to travelers in
the inns.

During the course of the day the feeding is continued by two little
dinners of the drollest composition. They are brought up on a tray of
red lacquer, in microscopic cups with covers, from Madame Prune's
apartment, where they are cooked: a hashed sparrow, a stuffed prawn,
seaweed with a sauce, a salt sweetmeat, a sugared chili. Chrysanthème
tastes a little of all, with dainty pecks and the aid of her little
chopsticks, raising the tips of her fingers with affected grace. At
every dish she makes a face, leaves three parts of it, and dries her
finger-tips after it in apparent disgust.

These menus vary according to the inspiration which may have seized
Madame Prune. But one thing never varies, either in our household or
in any other, neither in the north nor in the south of the Empire, and
that is the dessert and the manner of eating it: after all these
little dishes, which are a mere make-believe, is brought in a wooden
bowl, bound with copper,--an enormous bowl, fit for Gargantua, and
filled to the very brim with rice, plainly cooked in water.
Chrysanthème fills another large bowl from it (sometimes twice,
sometimes three times), darkens its snowy whiteness with a black sauce
flavored with fish which is contained in a delicately shaped blue
cruet, mixes it all together, carries the bowl to her lips, and crams
down all the rice, shoveling it with her two chopsticks into her very
throat. Next the little cups and covers are picked up, as well as the
tiniest crumb that may have fallen upon the white mats, the
irreproachable purity of which nothing is allowed to tarnish. And so
ends the dinner.




XXIII.

_August 2nd_.


Down below in the town, a street singer had established herself in a
little thoroughfare; people had collected around her to listen to her
singing, and we three--that is, Yves, Chrysanthème and I--who chanced
to be passing, stopped like others.

Quite young, rather fat, fairly pretty, she strummed her guitar and
sang, rolling her eyes fiercely, like a virtuoso executing feats of
difficulty. She lowered her head, stuck her chin into her neck, in
order to draw deeper notes from the furthermost recesses of her body;
and succeeded in bringing forth a great hoarse voice,--a voice that
might have belonged to an aged frog, a ventriloquist's voice, coming
from whence it would be impossible to say (this is the best stage
manner, the final word of art, for the interpretation of tragic
pieces).

Yves cast an indignant glance upon her:

"Good gracious," said he, "it's the voice of a--" (words failed him,
in his astonishment) "it's the voice of a--a monster!"

And he looked at me, almost frightened by this little being, and
anxious to know what I thought of it.

My poor Yves was out of temper on this occasion, because I had induced
him to come out in a straw hat with a turned-up brim, which did not
please him.

"It suits you remarkably well, Yves, I assure you."

"Oh, indeed! You say so, you. For my part, I think it looks like a
magpie's nest!"

As a fortunate diversion from the singer and the hat, here comes a
cortège, advancing towards us from the end of the street, something
remarkably like a funeral. Bonzes march in front dressed in robes of
black gauze, having much the appearance of Catholic priests; the
principal personage of the procession, the corpse, comes last, laid in
a sort of little closed palanquin which is daintily pretty. This is
followed by a band of mousmés, hiding their laughing faces beneath a
kind of veil, and carrying in vases of the sacred shape the artificial
lotus with silver petals indispensable at a funeral; then come fine
ladies, on foot, smirking and stifling a wish to laugh, beneath
parasols on which are painted in the gayest colors, butterflies and
storks.

Now they are quite close to us, we must stand back to give them room.
Chrysanthème all at once assumes a suitable air of gravity, and Yves
bares his head, taking off the magpie's nest.

Yes, it is true, it is death that is passing by!

I had almost lost sight of the fact, so little does this recall it.

The procession will climb high up, far away above Nagasaki, into the
heart of the green mountain all peopled with tombs. There the poor
fellow will be laid at rest, with his palanquin above him, and his
vases and his flowers of silvered paper. Well, at least the poor
defunct will lie in a charming spot commanding a lovely view.

They will now return half laughing, half sniveling, and to-morrow no
one will think of it again.




XXIV.

_August 4th_.


The _Triomphante_, which has been lying in the roadsteads almost at
the foot of the hill on which stands my house, enters the dock to-day
to undergo repairs rendered necessary by the long blockade of Formosa.

I am now a long way from my home, and obliged to cross by boat the
whole breadth of the bay when I wish to see Chrysanthème; for the dock
is situated on the shore opposite to Diou-djen-dji. It is sunk in a
little valley, narrow and deep, midst all kinds of foliage,--bamboos,
camellias, trees of all sorts; our masts and spars, seen from the
deck, look as if they were tangled among the branches.

The situation of the vessel--no longer afloat--gives the crew a
greater facility for clandestine escapes from the ship at no matter
what hour of the night, and our sailors have made friends with all
the girls of the villages perched on the mountains above us.

These quarters and his excessive liberty, give me some uneasiness
about my poor Yves; for this country of frivolous pleasure has a
little turned his head. Moreover, I am more and more convinced that he
is in love with Chrysanthème.

It is really a pity that the sentiment has not occurred to me instead,
since it is I who have gone the length of marrying her.




XXV.


Notwithstanding the increased distance, I continue my daily visits to
Diou-djen-dji. When night has fallen, and the four couples who compose
our society have joined us, as well as Yves and the _amazingly tall
friend_,--we descend again into the town, stumbling by lantern light
down the steep stairways and slopes of the old suburb.

This nocturnal stroll is always the same, and accompanied always by
the same amusements: we pause before the same queer stalls, we drink
the same sugared drinks served to us in the same little gardens. But
our troop is often more numerous: to begin with, we chaperon Oyouki
who is confided to our care by her parents; then we have two cousins
of my wife's--pretty little creatures; and lastly friends--guests of
sometimes only ten or twelve years old, little girls of the
neighborhood to whom our mousmés wish to show some politeness.

Oh! what a singular company of tiny beings forms our suite and follows
us into the tea-gardens in the evenings! The most absurd faces, with
sprigs of flowers stuck in the oddest fashion in their comical and
childish heads! One might suppose it was a whole school of mousmés out
for an evening's frolic under our care.

Yves returns with us, when time comes to remount our
hill,--Chrysanthème heaves great sighs like a tired child, and stops
on every step, leaning on our arms.

When we have reached our destination he says good-night, just touches
Chrysanthème's hand, and descending once more, by the slope which
leads to the quays and the shipping, he crosses the roadstead in a
sampan, to get on board the _Triomphante_.

Meantime, we, with the aid of a sort of secret key, open the door of
our garden, where Madame Prune's pots of flowers, ranged in the
darkness, send forth delicious odors in the night air. We cross the
garden by moonlight or starlight, and mount to our own rooms.

If it is very late,--a frequent occurrence,--we find all our wooden
panels drawn and tightly shut by the careful M. Sucre (as a precaution
against thieves), and our apartment is as close and as private as if
it were a real European one.

In this house, when every chink is thus closed, a strange odor mingles
with the musk and the lotus,--an odor essential to Japan, to the
yellow race, belonging to the soil or emanating from the venerable
woodwork; almost an odor of wild beast. The mosquito curtain of dark
blue gauze ready hung for the night, falls from the ceiling with the
air of a mysterious velum. The gilded Buddha smiles eternally at the
night-lamps burning before him; some great moth, a constant frequenter
of the house, which during the day sleeps clinging to our ceiling,
flutters at this hour under the very nose of the god, turning and
flitting round the thin quivering flames. And, motionless on the wall,
its feelers spread out starwise, sleeps some great garden spider,
which one must not kill because it is night. "Hou!" says Chrysanthème
indignantly, pointing it out to me with leveled finger. "Quick! where
is the fan kept for the purpose, wherewith to hunt it out of doors?"

Around us reigns a silence which is almost painful after all the
joyous noises of the town, and all the laughter, now hushed, of our
band of mousmés,--a silence of the country, of some sleeping village.




XXVI.


The noise of the innumerable wooden panels which at the fall of night
are pulled and shut in every Japanese house, is one of the
peculiarities of the country which will remain longest imprinted on my
memory. From our neighbors' houses, floating to us over the green
gardens, these noises reach us one after the other, in series, more or
less deadened, more or less distant.

Just below us, those of Madame Prune move very badly, creak and make a
hideous noise in their worn-out grooves.

Ours are somewhat noisy too, for the old house is full of echoes, and
there are at least twenty to run over long slides in order to close in
completely the kind of open hall in which we live. Generally it is
Chrysanthème who undertakes this piece of household work, and a great
deal of trouble it gives her, for she often pinches her fingers in the
singular awkwardness of her too tiny hands, which have never been
accustomed to do any work.

Then comes her toilette for the night. With a certain grace she lets
fall the day-dress, and slips on a more simple one of blue cotton,
which has the same pagoda sleeves, the same shape all but the train,
and which she fastens round her waist by a sash of muslin of the same
color.

The high head-dress remains untouched, it is needless to say; all but
the pins which are taken out and laid beside her in a lacquer box.

Then there is the little silver pipe that must absolutely be smoked
before going to sleep; this is one of the customs which most provokes
me, but has to be borne.

Chrysanthème, like a gypsy, squats before a particular square box,
made of red wood, which contains a little tobacco jar, a little
porcelain stove full of hot embers, and finally a little bamboo pot
serving at the same time as ash-tray and spittoon. (Madame Prune's
smoking-box downstairs, and every smoking-box in Japan, both of men
and women, is exactly the same, and contains precisely the same
objects, arranged in precisely the same manner; and wherever it may
be, whether in the house of the rich or the poor, it always lies
about somewhere on the floor.)

The word "pipe" is at once too trivial and too big to be applied to
this delicate silver tube, which is perfectly straight and at the end
of which, in a microscopic receptacle, is placed one pinch of golden
tobacco, chopped finer than silken thread.

Two puffs, or at most three; it lasts scarcely a few seconds, and the
pipe is finished. Then _pan, pan, pan, pan,_ the little tube is struck
smartly against the edge of the smoking-box to knock out the ashes,
which never will fall; and this tapping, heard everywhere, in every
house, at every hour of the day or night, quick and droll as the
scratching of a monkey, is in Japan one of the noises most
characteristic of human life.

"Anata nominasé!" ("You must smoke too!") says Chrysanthème.

Having again filled the vexatious little pipe, she puts the silver
tube to my lips with a bow. Courtesy forbids my refusal; but I find it
detestably bitter.

Now, before laying myself down under the blue mosquito-net, I open two
of the panels in the room, one on the side of the silent and deserted
footpath, the other one on the garden side, overlooking the terraces,
so that the night air may breathe upon us, even at the risk of
bringing us the company of some belated cockchafer, or more giddy
moth.

Our wooden house, with its thin old walls, vibrates at night like a
great dry fiddle; the slightest noises grow great in it, become
disfigured and positively disquieting.

Beneath the verandah are hung two little Æolian harps, which at the
least ruffle of the breeze running through their blades of grass, emit
a gentle tinkling sound, like the harmonious murmur of a brook;
outside, to the very furthest limits of the distance, the cicalas
continue their great and everlasting concert; over our heads, on the
black roof, is heard passing like a witch's sabbath, the raging battle
to the death of cats, rats and owls.

Presently, when in the early dawn, a fresher breeze, mounting upwards
from the sea and the deep harbor, reaches us, Chrysanthème will slyly
get up and shut the panels I have opened.

Before that, however, she will have risen at least three times to
smoke: having yawned like a cat, stretched herself, twisted in every
direction her little amber arms, and her graceful little hands, she
sits up resolutely, with all the waking groans and half words of a
child, pretty and fascinating enough: then she emerges from the gauze
tent, fills her little pipe, and breathes a few puffs of the bitter
and unpleasant mixture.

Then comes _pan, pan, pan, pan,_ against the box to shake out the
ashes. In the resounding sonority of the night it makes quite a
terrible noise, which wakes Madame Prune. This is fatal. Madame Prune
is at once seized also with a longing to smoke which may not be
denied; then, to the noise from above, comes an answering _pan, pan,
pan, pan,_ from below, exactly like it, exasperating and inevitable as
an echo.




XXVII.


More cheerful are the noises of the morning: the cocks crowing, the
wooden panels all round the neighborhood sliding back upon their
rollers; or the strange cry of some little fruit-hawker, patrolling
our lofty suburb in the early dawn. And the grasshoppers absolutely
seem to chirp more loudly, to celebrate the return of the sunlight.

Above all, rises to our ears from below the sound of Madame Prune's
long prayers, ascending through the floor, monotonous as the song of a
somnambulist, regular and soothing as the splash of a fountain. It
lasts three-quarters of an hour at least; it drones along, a rapid
flow of words in a high nasal key; from time to time, when the
inattentive Spirits are not listening, it is accompanied by a clapping
of dry palms, or by harsh sounds from a kind of wooden clapper made of
two discs of mandragora root; it is an uninterrupted stream of prayer;
its flow never ceases, and the quavering continues without stopping,
like the bleating of an old nanny-goat in delirium.

_"After having washed the hands and feet"_ say the sacred books, _"the
great God Ama-Térace-Omi-Kami, who is the royal power of Japan, must
be invoked; the manes of all the defunct Emperors descended from him
must also be invoked; next, the manes of all his personal ancestors,
to the furthest generation; the Spirits of the Air and Sea; the
Spirits of all secret and impure places; the Spirits of the tombs of
the district whence you spring, etc., etc."_

"I worship and implore you," sings Madame Prune, "Oh
Ama-Térace-Omi-Kami, royal power. Cease not to protect your faithful
people, who are ready to sacrifice themselves for their country. Grant
that I may become as holy as yourself, and drive from my mind all dark
thoughts. I am a coward and a sinner; purge me from my cowardice and
sinfulness, even as the north wind drives the dust into the sea. Wash
me clean from all my iniquities, as one washes away uncleanness in the
river of Kamo. Make me the richest woman in the world. I believe in
your glory, which shall be spread over the whole earth, and illuminate
it forever for my happiness. Grant me the continued good health of my
family, and above all, my own, who, oh Ama-Térace-Omi-Kami, do worship
and adore you, and only you, etc., etc."

Here follow all the Emperors, all the Spirits, and the interminable
list of the ancestors.

In her trembling old woman's falsetto, Madame Prune sings out all
this, without omitting anything, at a pace which almost takes away her
breath.

And very strange it is to hear: at length it seems hardly a human
voice; it sounds like a series of magic formulas, unwinding themselves
from an inexhaustible roller, and escaping to take flight through the
air. By its very weirdness, and by the persistency of its incantation,
it ends by producing in my scarcely awakened brain, an almost
religious impression.

Every day I wake to the sound of this Shintoist litany chanted beneath
me, vibrating through the exquisite clearness of the summer
mornings,--while our night-lamps burn low before the smiling Buddha,
while the eternal sun, scarcely risen, already sends through the
cracks of our wooden panels its bright rays, which dart like golden
arrows through our darkened dwelling and our blue gauze tent.

This is the moment at which I must rise, descend hurriedly to the sea
by grassy footpaths all wet with dew, and so regain my ship.

Alas! in the days gone by, it was the cry of the muezzin which used to
awaken me in the dark winter mornings, in far-away night-shrouded
Stamboul.





XXVIII


Chrysanthème has brought but few things with her, knowing that our
married life would be of short duration.

She has placed her dresses and her fine sashes in little closed
recesses, hidden in one of the walls of our apartment (the north wall,
the only one of the four which will not take to pieces.) The doors of
these niches are white paper panels; the standing shelves and inside
partitions, consisting of light woodwork, are put together in too
finical a manner, too ingenious a way, giving rise to suspicions of
secret drawers and conjuring tricks. We only put there things without
any value, having a vague feeling that the cupboards themselves might
spirit them away.

The box in which Chrysanthème stores away her gewgaws and letters, is
one of the things that amuses me the most; it is of English origin, in
tin, and bears on its cover the colored representation of some
manufactory in the neighborhood of London. Of course, it is as an
exotic work of art, as a precious knick-knack, that Chrysanthème
prefers it to any of her other boxes in lacquer or inlaid work. It
contains all that a mousmé requires for her correspondence: Indian
ink, a paintbrush, very thin gray tinted paper, cut up in long narrow
strips, and funnily shaped envelopes, into which these strips are
slipped (after having been folded up in some thirty folds); the
envelopes being ornamented with pictures of landscapes, fishes, crabs,
or birds.

On some old letters addressed to her, I can make out the two
characters that represent her name: "Kikou-San" (Chrysanthème,
Madame). And when I question her, she replies in Japanese, with an air
of importance:

"My dear creature, they are letters from my female friends."

Oh! those friends of Chrysanthème, what funny little faces they have!
That same box contains their portraits, their photographs stuck on
visiting cards, which are printed on the back with the name of Uyeno,
the fashionable photographer in Nagasaki,--little creatures fit only
to figure daintily on painted fans, and who have striven to assume a
dignified attitude when once their necks have been placed in the
head-rest and they have been told: "Now don't move!"

It would really amuse me to read her friends' letters,--and above all
my mousmé's answers.




XXIX.

_August 10th_.


This evening it rained heavily, and the night was thick and black. At
about ten o'clock, on our return from one of the fashionable
tea-houses we constantly frequent, we arrived,--Yves, Chrysanthème and
myself,--at the certain familiar angle of the principal street, the
certain turn where we must take leave of the lights and noises of the
town, to clamber up the black steps and steep lanes which lead to our
home at Diou-djen-dji.

There, before beginning our ascension, we must first buy lanterns from
an old trades-woman called Madame Très-Propre,[E] whose faithful
customers we are. It is amazing what a quantity of these paper
lanterns we consume. They are invariably decorated in the same way,
with painted night-moths or bats; fastened to the ceiling at the
further end of the shop, they hang in enormous clusters, and the old
woman, seeing us arrive, gets upon a table to take them down. Gray or
red are our usual choice; Madame Très-Propre knows our preferences and
leaves the green or blue lanterns aside. But it is always hard work to
unhook one, on account of the little short sticks by which they are
held, and the strings by which they are tied getting entangled
together. In an exaggerated pantomime, Madame Très-Propre expresses
her despair at wasting so much of our valuable time: oh! if it only
depended on her personal efforts! but ah, for the natural perversity
of inanimate things which have no consideration for human dignity.
With monkeyish antics, she even deems it her duty to threaten the
lanterns and shake her fist at these inextricably tangled strings
which have the presumption to delay us. It is all very well, but we
know this maneuver by heart; and if the old lady loses patience, so do
we. Chrysanthème, who is half asleep, is seized with a fit of
kitten-like yawning which she does not even trouble to hide behind
her hand, and which appears to be endless. She pulls a very long face,
at the thought of the steep hill we must struggle up to-night through
the pelting rain.

[Footnote E: In Japanese: _O Séï-San_.]

I have the same feeling, and am thoroughly annoyed.

To what purpose, good heavens, do I clamber up every evening to that
suburb, when it offers me no attraction whatever?

The rain increases, what are we to do? Outside, djins pass rapidly by,
calling out: "Take care!" splashing the foot-passengers and casting
through the shower streams of light from their many-colored lanterns.
Mousmés and elderly ladies pass by, tucked up, muddy, laughing
nevertheless, under their paper umbrellas, exchanging greetings,
clacking their wooden pattens on the stone pavement; the whole street
is filled with the noise of the pattering feet and pattering rain.

As good luck will have it, at the same moment passes 415, our poor
relative, who, seeing our distress, stops and promises to help us out
of our difficulty; as soon as he has deposited on the quay an
Englishman he is conveying, he will come to our aid and bring all that
is necessary to relieve us from our lamentable situation.

At last our lantern is unhooked, lighted, and paid for. There is
another shop opposite, where we stop every evening; it is Madame
L'Heure's,[F] the woman who sells waffles; we always buy a provision
from her, to refresh us on the way. A very lively young woman is this
pastry-cook, and most anxious to make herself agreeable; she looks
quite like a screen picture, behind her piled-up cakes, ornamented
with little posies. We will take shelter under her roof while we wait;
and, to avoid the drops that fall heavily from the water-spouts, wedge
ourselves tightly against her display of white and pink sweetmeats, so
artistically spread out on fresh and delicate branches of cypress.

[Footnote F: In Japanese: _Tôki-San_.]

Poor 415, what a providence he is to us! Already he re-appears, most
excellent cousin, ever smiling, ever running, while the water streams
down his handsome bare legs; he brings us two umbrellas, borrowed from
a China merchant, who is also a distant relative of ours. Like me,
Yves has till now never consented to use such a thing, but he now
accepts one because it is droll: in paper, of course, with innumerable
folds waxed and gummed, and the inevitable flight of storks forming a
wreath all round.

Chrysanthème, yawning more and more in her kitten-like fashion,
becomes coaxing in order to be helped along, and tries to take my arm:

"I beg you, mousmé, this evening to take the arm of Yves-San; I am
sure that will suit us all three."

And there they go, she, tiny figure, hanging on to the big fellow, and
so they climb up. I lead the way, carrying the lantern that lights our
steps, and whose flame I protect as well as I can under my fantastic
umbrella. On each side of the road is heard the roaring torrent of
stormy waters rolling down from the mountain side. To-night the way
seems long, difficult and slippery; a succession of interminable
flights of steps, gardens and houses piled up one above another; waste
lands, and trees which in the darkness shake their dripping foliage on
our heads.

One would say that Nagasaki is ascending at the same time as
ourselves; but yonder, and very far away, in a kind of vapory mist
which seems luminous on the blackness of the sky; and from the town
there rises a confused murmur of voices and rumbling of gongs and
laughter.

The summer rain has not yet refreshed the atmosphere. On account of
the stormy heat, the little suburban houses have been left open like
sheds, and we can see all that is going on. Lamps ever lighted burn
before the altars dedicated to Buddha and to the souls of the
ancestors; but all good Niponese have already lain down to rest. Under
the traditional tents of bluish-green gauze, we can see them,
stretched out in rows by whole families; they are either sleeping, or
hunting the mosquitoes, or fanning themselves. Niponese men and women,
Niponese babies too, lying side by side with their parents; each one,
young or old, in his little dark-blue cotton night-dress, and with his
little wooden block to rest the nape of his neck.

A few houses are open, where amusements are still going on; here and
there, from the somber gardens, the sound of a guitar reaches our
ears, some dance giving in its weird rhythm a strange impression of
sadness.

Here is the well, surrounded by bamboos, where we are wont to make a
nocturnal halt for Chrysanthème to take breath. Yves begs me to throw
forward the red gleam of my lantern, in order to recognize the place,
for it marks our half-way resting place.

And at last, at last, here is our house! The door is closed, all is
silent and black. Our panels have been carefully shut by M. Sucre and
Madame Prune; the rain streams down the wood of our old black walls.

In such weather it is impossible to allow Yves to return down hill,
and wander along the shore in quest of a sampan. No, he shall not
return on board to-night; we will put him up in our house. His little
room has indeed been already provided for in the conditions of our
lease, and notwithstanding his discreet refusal, we immediately set to
work to make it. Let us go in, take off our boots, shake ourselves
like so many cats that have been out in a shower, and step up to our
apartment.

In front of Buddha, the little lamps are burning; in the middle of the
room, the night-blue gauze is stretched. On entering, the first
impression is a favorable one; our dwelling is pretty, this evening,
the late hour and deep silence give it an air of mystery. And then
also, in such weather, it is always pleasant to get home.

Come, let us at once prepare Yves' room. Chrysanthème, quite elated at
the prospect of having her big friend near her, sets to work with a
good will; moreover, the task is an easy one, we have only to slip
three or four paper panels in their grooves, to make at once a
separate room or compartment in the great box we live in. I had
thought that these panels were entirely white; but no! on each of them
is a group of two storks painted in gray tints in those inevitable
attitudes consecrated by Japanese art: one bearing aloft its proud
head and haughtily raising its leg, the other scratching itself. Oh
these storks! how sick one gets of them, at the end of a month spent
in Japan!

Yves is now in bed and sleeping under our roof.

Sleep has come to him sooner than to me to-night; for somehow I fancy
I had seen long glances exchanged between him and Chrysanthème.

I have left this little creature in his hands like a toy, and I begin
to fear lest I should have thrown some perturbation in his mind. I do
not trouble my head about this little Japanese girl. But Yves,--it
would be decidedly wrong on his part, and would greatly diminish my
faith in him.

We hear the rain falling on our old roof; the cicalas are mute; odors
of wet earth reach us from the gardens and the mountain. I feel
terribly dreary in this room to-night; the noise of the little pipe
irritates me more than usual, and as Chrysanthème crouches in front of
her smoking-box, I suddenly discover in her an air of low breeding, in
the very worst sense of the word.

I should hate her, my mousmé, if she were to entice Yves into
committing a fault,--a fault which I should perhaps never be able to
forgive.




XXX.

_August 12th_.


The Y---- and Sikou-San couple were divorced yesterday. The Charles
N---- and Campanule household is getting on very badly. They have had
some annoyance with those prying, grinding, insupportable little men,
dressed up in suits of gray, who are called police agents and who by
threatening their landlord, have had them turned out of their
house--under the obsequious amiability of this people, there lurks a
secret hatred towards us Europeans--they are therefore obliged to
accept their mother-in-law's hospitality, a very painful position. And
then Charles N---- fancies his wife is faithless. It is hardly
possible, however, for us to deceive ourselves: these would-be
maidens, to whom M. Kangourou has introduced us, are young people who
have already had in their lives one, or perhaps more than one,
adventure; it is therefore only natural that we should have our
suspicions.

The Z---- and Touki-San couple jog on, quarreling all the time.

My household maintains a more dignified air, though it is none the
less dreary. I had indeed thought of a divorce, but have really no
good reason for offering Chrysanthème such a gratuitous affront;
moreover there is another more imperative reason why I should remain
quiet: I too have had difficulties with the civilian authorities.

Day before yesterday, M. Sucre quite upset, Madame Prune almost
swooning, and Mdlle. Oyouki bathed in tears, stormed my rooms. The
Niponese police agents had called and threatened them with the law for
letting rooms outside of the European concession to a Frenchman
morganatically married to a Japanese; and the terror of being
prosecuted brought them to me, with a thousand apologies, but the
humble request that I should leave.

The next day I therefore went off, accompanied by _the wonderfully
tall friend_, who expresses himself better than I do in Japanese, to
the register office, with the full intention of making a terrible row.

In the language of this exquisitely polite people, terms of abuse are
totally wanting; when very angry, one is obliged to be satisfied with
using the _thou_, mark of _inferiority_ and the _familiar
conjugation_, habitual towards those of low birth. Seating myself on
the table used for weddings, in the midst of all the flurried little
policemen, I open the conversation in the following terms:

"In order that _thou shouldest_ leave me in peace in the suburb I am
inhabiting, what bribe must I offer _thee_, set of little beings more
contemptible than any mere street porter?"

Great and mute scandal, silent consternation, and low bows greet my
words.

"Certainly," they at last reply, my honorable person shall not be
molested, indeed they ask for nothing better. Only, in order to
subscribe to the laws of the country, I ought to have come here and
given my name and that of the young person that--with whom--

"Oh! that is going too far! I came here on purpose, contemptible
creatures, not three weeks ago!"

Then taking up myself the civil register, and turning over the pages
rapidly, I found my signature and beside it the little hieroglyphics
drawn by Chrysanthème:

"There, set of idiots, look at that!"

Arrival of a very high functionary,--a ridiculous little old fellow in
a black coat, who from his office has been listening to the row:

"What is the matter? What is it? What is this annoyance put upon the
French officers?"

I politely state my case to this personage, who cannot make apologies
and promises enough. The little agents prostrate themselves on all
fours, sink into the earth; and we leave them, cold and dignified,
without returning their bows.

M. Sucre and Madame Prune can now make their minds easy, they will not
be disturbed again.




XXXI.

_August 23rd_.


The prolonged stay of the _Triomphante_ in the dock, and the distance
of our home from town, have been my pretext these last two or three
days for not going up to Diou-djen-dji to see Chrysanthème.

It is dreary work though in these docks. With the early dawn a legion
of little Japanese workmen invade us, bringing their dinners in
baskets and gourds like the working-men in our arsenals, but with a
needy, shabby appearance, and a ferreting, hurried manner which
reminds one of rats. Silently they slip under the keel, at the bottom
of the hold, in all the holes, sawing, nailing, repairing.

The heat is intense in this spot, overshadowed by the rocks and
tangled masses of foliage.

At two o'clock, in the broad sunlight, we have a new and far prettier
kind of invasion: that of the beetles and butterflies.

Butterflies as wonderful as those on the fans. Some all black, giddily
dash up against us, so light and airy that they seem merely a pair of
quivering wings fastened together without any body.

Yves astonished, gazes at them, saying in his boyish manner: "Oh, I
saw such a big one just now, such a big one, it quite frightened me; I
thought it was a bat attacking me."

A steersman who has captured a very curious specimen, carries it off
carefully to press between the leaves of his signal-book, like a
flower. Another sailor passing by, taking his small roast to the oven
in a mess-bowl, looks at him funnily and says:

"You had much better give it to me. I'd cook it!"




XXXII.


_August 24th_.

It is nearly five days since I have abandoned my home and
Chrysanthème.

Since yesterday we have had a storm of rain and wind--(a typhoon that
has passed or is passing over us). We beat to quarters in the middle
of the night to _lower the top-masts, strike the lower yards_, and
take every precaution against bad weather. The butterflies no longer
hover around us, but everything tosses and writhes overhead: on the
steep slopes of the mountain, the trees shiver, the long grasses bend
low as though in pain; terrible gusts rack them with a hissing sound;
branches, bamboo leaves, and earth are showered down like rain upon
us.

In this land of pretty little trifles, this violent tempest is out of
all harmony; it seems as if its efforts were exaggerated and its music
too loud.

Towards evening the big dark clouds roll by so rapidly, that the
showers are of short duration and soon pass over. Then I attempt a
walk on the mountain above us, in the wet verdure: little pathways
lead up it, between thickets of camellias and bamboos.

Waiting till a shower is over, I take refuge in the courtyard of an
old temple half-way up the hill, buried in a wood of centennial trees
of gigantic branches; it is reached by granite steps, through strange
gateways, as deeply furrowed as the old Celtic dolmens. The trees
have also invaded this yard; the daylight is overcast with a greenish
tint, and the drenching rain that pours down in torrents, is full of
torn-up leaves and moss. Old granite monsters, of unknown shapes, are
seated in the corners, and grimace with smiling ferocity; their faces
are full of indefinable mystery that makes me shudder amid the moaning
music of the wind, in the gloomy shadows of the clouds and branches.

They could not have resembled the Japanese of our day, the men who had
thus conceived these ancient temples, who built them everywhere, and
filled the country with them, even in its most solitary nooks.

       *       *       *       *       *

An hour later, in the twilight of that stormy day, on the same
mountain, I chanced upon a clump of trees somewhat similar to oaks in
appearance; they, too, have been twisted by the tempest, and the tufts
of undulating grass at their feet are laid low, tossed about in every
direction. There, I suddenly have brought back to my mind, my first
impression of a strong wind in the woods of Limoise, in the province
of Saintonge, some twenty-eight years ago, in a month of March of my
childhood.

That, the first storm of wind my eyes ever beheld sweeping over the
landscape, blew in just the opposite quarter of the world,--and many
years have rapidly passed over that memory,--since then the best part
of my life has been spent.

I refer too often, I fancy, to my childhood; I am foolishly fond of
it. But it seems to me that then only did I truly experience
sensations or impressions; the smallest trifles I then saw or heard
were full of deep and hidden meaning, recalling past images out of
oblivion, and reawakening memories of prior existence; or else they
were presentiments of existences to come, future incarnations in the
land of dreams, expectations of wondrous marvels that life and the
world held in store for me,--for later, no doubt, when I should be
grown up. Well, I have grown up, and have found nothing that answered
to my undefinable expectations; on the contrary, all has narrowed and
darkened around me, my vague recollections of the past have become
blurred, the horizons before me have slowly closed in and become full
of a gray darkness. Soon will my time come to return to eternal rest,
and I shall leave this world without having understood the mysterious
wherefore of these mirages of my childhood; I shall bear away with me
a lingering regret, of I know not what lost home that I have failed to
find, of the unknown beings ardently longed for, whom, alas, I have
never embraced.




XXXIII.


With many affectations, M. Sucre has dipped the tip of his delicate
paint-brush in Indian ink and traced a couple of charming storks on a
pretty sheet of rice-paper, offering them to me in the most gracious
manner, as a souvenir of himself. They are here, in my cabin on board,
and whenever I look at them, I can fancy I see M. Sucre tracing them
in an airy manner, with elegant facility.

The saucer in which M. Sucre mixes his ink, is in itself a little gem.
Chiselled out of a piece of jade, it represents a tiny lake with a
carved border imitating rockwork. On this border is a little mama
toad, also in jade, advancing as though to bathe in the little lake in
which M. Sucre carefully keeps a few drops of very dark liquid. The
mama toad has four little baby toads, equally in jade, one perched on
her head, the other three playing about under her.

M. Sucre has painted many a stork in the course of his lifetime, and
he really excels in reproducing groups and duets, if one may so
express it, of this kind of bird. Few Japanese possess the art of
interpreting this subject in a manner at once so rapid and so
tasteful; first he draws the two beaks, then the four claws, then the
backs, the feathers, dash, dash, dash,--with a dozen strokes of his
clever brush, held in his daintily posed hand, it is done, and always
perfectly well done!

M. Kangourou relates, without seeing anything wrong in it whatever,
that formerly this talent was of great service to M. Sucre. It appears
that Madame Prune,--how shall I say such a thing, and who could guess
it now, on beholding so devout and sedate an old lady, with eyebrows
so scrupulously shaven!--however, it appears that Madame Prune used to
receive a great many visits from gentlemen,--gentlemen who always came
alone, and it led to some gossip. Therefore, when Madame Prune was
engaged with one visitor, if a new arrival made his appearance, the
ingenious husband, to make him wait patiently, and to while away the
time in the ante-room, immediately offered to paint him some storks in
a variety of attitudes.

And this is how, in Nagasaki, all the Japanese gentlemen of a certain
age, have in their collections two or three of these little pictures,
for which they are indebted to the delicate and original talent of M.
Sucre.




XXXIV.


_Sunday, August 25th_.

At about six o'clock, while I was on duty, the _Triomphante_ left her
prison walls between the mountains and came out of dock. After a great
uproar of maneuvering we took up our old moorings in the roadstead, at
the foot of the Diou-djen-dji hills. The weather was again calm and
cloudless, the sky presenting a peculiar clearness as though it had
been swept clean by the cyclone, an exceeding transparency bringing
out the minutest details of the far distance till then unseen; as if
the terrible blast had blown away every vestige of the floating mists
and left behind it nothing but void and boundless space. The coloring
of woods and mountains stood out again in the resplendent verdancy of
spring after the torrents of rain, like the wet colors of some freshly
washed painting. The sampans and junks, which for the last three days
had been lying under shelter, had now put out to sea, and the bay was
covered with their white sails, which looked like an immense flight of
seabirds.

At eight o'clock, at nightfall, our maneuver being at an end, I
embarked with Yves on board a sampan; this time it is he who is
carrying me off and taking me back to my home.

On land, a delicious perfume of new-mown hay greets us, and the road
across the mountains lies bathed in glorious moonlight. We go straight
up to Diou-djen-dji to join Chrysanthème; I feel almost remorseful,
although I hardly show it, for my neglect of her.

Looking up, I recognize from afar my little house, perched on high. It
is wide open and lit up; I even hear the sound of guitar. Then I
perceive the gilt head of my Buddha between: the little bright flames
of its two hanging night lamps. Now Chrysanthème appears on the
verandah, looking out as if she expected us; and with her wonderful
bows of hair and long falling sleeves, her silhouette is thoroughly
Niponese.

As I enter, she comes forward to kiss me, in a graceful, though rather
hesitating manner, while Oyouki, more demonstrative, throws her arms
around me.

It is with a certain pleasure that I see once more this Japanese home,
which I wonder to find still mine when I had almost forgotten its
existence. Chrysanthème has put fresh flowers in our vases, spread out
her hair, donned her best clothes, and lighted our lamps to honor my
return. From the balcony she had watched the _Triomphante_ leave the
dock, and, in the expectation of our now prompt return, she had made
her preparations; then, to while away the time, she was studying a
duet on the guitar with Oyouki. Not a question or reproach did she
make. On the contrary:

"We quite understood," she said, "how impossible it was, in such
dreadful weather, to undertake so lengthy a crossing in a sampan."

She smiled like a pleased child, and I should be fastidious indeed if
I did not admit that to-night she is charming.

I announce my intention of starting off for a long stroll through
Nagasaki; we will take Oyouki-San and two little cousins who happen to
be there, as well as some other neighbors, if they wish to; we will
buy the funniest toys, eat all sorts of cakes, and amuse ourselves to
our hearts' content.

"How lucky we are to be here, just at the right moment," they exclaim,
jumping with joy. "How fortunate we are! This very evening there is to
be a pilgrimage to the great temple of the _Jumping Tortoise!_ The
whole town will be there; all our married friends have already
started, the whole set, X----, Y----, Z----, Touki-San, Campanule, and
Jonquille, with _the friend of amazing height_." And those two, poor
Chrysanthème and poor Oyouki, would have been obliged to stay at home
with heavy hearts, because we had not yet arrived, and because Madame
Prune had been seized with faintness and hysterics after her dinner.

Quickly the mousmés must deck themselves out. Chrysanthème is ready;
Oyouki hurries, changes her dress, and, putting on a mouse-colored
gray robe, begs me to arrange the bows of her fine sash--black satin
lined with yellow--sticking at the same time in her hair a silver
top-knot. We light our lanterns, swinging at the end of little sticks;
M. Sucre, overwhelming us with thanks for his daughter, accompanies us
on all fours to the door,--and we go off gayly through the clear and
balmy night.

Below, we find the town in all the animation of a great holiday. The
streets are thronged; the crowd passes by,--a laughing, capricious,
slow, unequal tide, flowing onwards, however, steadily in the same
direction, towards the same goal. There arises therefrom an immense
but light murmur in which dominate the sounds of laughter, and the
low-toned interchange of polite speeches. Then follow lanterns upon
lanterns. Never in my life have I seen so many, so variegated, so
complicated, and so extraordinary.

We follow, drifting with the surging crowd, borne along by it. There
are groups of women of every age, decked out in their smartest
clothes, crowds of mousmés with aigrettes of flowers in their hair, or
little silver top-knots like Oyouki,--pretty little physiognomies,
little narrow eyes peeping between slit lids like those of a new-born
kitten, fat pale little cheeks, round, puffed-out, half-opened lips.
They are pretty, nevertheless, these little Niponese, in their smiles
and childishness.

The men, on the other hand, wear many a pot hat, pompously added to
the long national robe, and giving thereby a finishing touch to their
cheerful ugliness, resembling nothing so much as dancing monkeys. They
carry boughs in their hands, whole shrubs, even, amidst the foliage of
which dangle all sorts of curious lanterns in the shape of imps and
birds.

As we advance in the direction of the temple, the streets become more
noisy and crowded. All along the houses are endless stalls raised on
trestles, displaying sweetmeats of every color, toys, branches of
flowers, nosegays, and masks. There are masks everywhere, boxes full
of them, carts full of them; the most popular being the one that
represents the livid and cunning muzzle, contracted as by a deathlike
grimace, the long straight ears, sharp-pointed teeth of the white fox,
sacred to the God of Rice. There are also others symbolic of gods or
monsters, livid, grimacing, convulsed, with wigs and beards of natural
hair. All manner of folk, even children, purchase these horrors, and
fasten them over their faces. Every sort of instrument is for sale,
amongst them many of those crystal trumpets which sound so
strangely,--this evening they are enormous, six feet long at
least,--and the noise they make is unlike anything ever heard before:
one would say gigantic turkeys gobbling amongst the crowd, and
striving to inspire fear.

In the religious amusements of this people it is not possible for us
to penetrate the mysteriously hidden meaning of things; we cannot
divine the boundary at which jesting stops and mystic fear steps in.
These customs, these symbols, these masks, all that tradition and
atavism have jumbled together in the Japanese brain, proceed from
sources utterly dark and unknown to us; even the oldest records fail
to explain them to us in anything but a superficial and cursory
manner, _simply because we have absolutely nothing in common with this
people_. We pass in the midst of their mirth and their laughter
without understanding the wherefore, so totally does it differ from
our own.

       *       *       *       *       *

Chrysanthème with Yves, Oyouki with me, Fraise and Zinia, our cousins,
walking before us under our watchful eye, slowly move through the
crowd, holding each others' hands lest we should lose one another.

All along the streets leading to the temple, the wealthy inhabitants
have decorated the fronts of their houses with a quantity of vases and
nosegays. The peculiar shed-like buildings habitual in this country,
with their open platform frontage, are particularly well suited for
the display of choice objects; all the houses have been thrown open,
and the interiors are hung with draperies that hide the back of the
apartments. In front of these hangings and slightly standing back from
the movement of the passing crowd, the various exhibited articles are
methodically placed in a row, under the full glare of hanging lamps.
Hardly any flowers compose the nosegays, nothing but foliage,--some
rare and priceless, others chosen as if purposely from amongst the
commonest plants, arranged however with such taste as to make them
appear new and choice; ordinary lettuce leaves, tall cabbage stalks
are placed with exquisite artificial taste in vessels of marvelous
workmanship. All the vases are of bronze, but the designs are varied
according to each changing fancy: some complicated and twisted;
others, and by far the largest number, graceful and simple, but of a
simplicity so studied and exquisite that to our eyes they seem the
revelation of an unknown art, the subversion of all acquired notions
on form.

       *       *       *       *       *

On turning a corner of a street, by good luck we meet our married
comrades of the _Triomphante_ and Jonquille, Touki-San and Campanule!
Bows and curtsies are exchanged by the mousmés, reciprocal
manifestations of joy at meeting; then, forming a compact band, we are
carried off by the ever-increasing crowd and continue our progress in
the direction of the temple.

The streets gradually ascend (the temples are always built on a
height); and by degrees as we mount up, there is added to the
brilliant fairyland of lanterns and costumes, yet another, ethereally
blue in the haze of distance; all Nagasaki, its pagodas, its
mountains, its still waters full of the rays of moonlight, seem to
rise up with us into the air. Slowly, step by step, one may say it
springs up around, enveloping in one great shimmering veil all the
foreground, with its dazzling red lights and many-colored streamers.

No doubt we are getting near, for here are the religious steps,
porticos and monsters hewn out of enormous blocks of granite. We now
have to climb a series of steps, almost earned by the surging crowd
ascending with us.

The temple court-yard; we have arrived.

This is the last and most astonishing scene in the evening's
fairy-tale,--a luminous and weird scene with fantastic distances
lighted up by the moon and the gigantic trees, the sacred
cryptomerias, stretching forth their dark somber boughs like a vast
dome.

Here we are all seated with our mousmés, beneath the light awning
wreathed in flowers, of one of the many little tea-houses improvised
in this courtyard. We are on a terrace at the top of the great steps,
up which the crowd continues to flock; we are at the foot of a portico
which stands up erect with the rigid massiveness of a colossus against
the dark night sky; at the foot also of a monster, who stares down
upon us, with his big stony eyes, his cruel grimace and smile.

This portico and the monster are the two great overwhelming masses in
the foreground of the incredible scene before us; they stand out with
dazzling boldness against the vague and ashy blue of the distant
sphere beyond; behind them, Nagasaki is spread out in a bird's-eye
view, faintly outlined in the transparent darkness with myriads of
little colored lights, and the extravagantly dented profile of the
mountains is delineated on the starlit sky, blue upon blue,
transparency upon transparency. A corner of the harbor is also
visible, high up, undefined like a lake lost in the clouds; the water
faintly illumined by a ray of moonlight shining forth like a sheet of
silver.

Around us the long crystal trumpets keep up their gobble. Groups of
polite and frivolous persons pass and repass like fantastic shadows:
childish bands of small-eyed mousmés with smile so candidly
meaningless and chignons shining through their bright silver flowers;
ugly men waving at the end of long branches their eternal lanterns
shaped like birds, gods or insects.

Behind us, in the lit-up and wide-open temple, the bonzes sit,
immovable embodiments of doctrine, in the glittering sanctuary
inhabited by divinities, chimeras and symbols. The crowd, monotonously
droning its mingled prayers and laughter, presses around them, sowing
its alms broadcast; with a continuous jingle, the money rolls on the
ground into the precincts reserved to the priests, where the white
mats entirely disappear under the mass of many-sized coins accumulated
there as after a deluge of silver and bronze.

We, however, feel thoroughly at sea in the midst of this festivity; we
look on, we laugh like the rest, we make foolish and senseless remarks
in a language insufficiently learned, and which this evening, I know
not why, we can hardly understand. Notwithstanding the night breeze,
we find it very hot under our awning, and we absorb quantities of
funny-looking water-ices, served in cups, which taste like scented
frost, or rather like flowers steeped in snow. Our mousmés order for
themselves great bowls of candied beans mixed with hail,--real
hail-stones such as we would pick up after a hail-storm in March.

Glou! glou! glou! the crystal trumpets slowly repeat their notes, the
powerful sonority of which has a labored and smothered sound, as
though they came from under water; they mingle with the jingling of
rattles and the noise of castanets. We also have the impression of
being carried away in the irresistible swing of this incomprehensible
gayety, composed in proportions we can scarcely measure, of elements
mystic, puerile and even ghastly. A sort of religious terror is
diffused by the hidden idols divined in the temple behind us; by the
mumbled prayers, confusedly heard; above all, by the horrible heads in
lacquered wood, representing foxes, which, as they pass, hide human
faces,--hideous livid masks.

In the gardens and outbuildings of the temple the most inconceivable
mountebanks have taken up their quarters, their black streamers,
painted with white letters, looking like funereal trappings as they
float in the wind from the top of their tall flagstaffs. Hither we
turn out steps, as soon as our mousmés have ended their orisons and
bestowed their alms.

In one of the booths a man stretched on a table, flat on his back, is
alone on the stage; puppets of almost human size, with horribly
grinning masks, spring out of his body; they speak, gesticulate, then
fall back like empty rags; with a sudden spring, they start up again,
change their costumes, change their faces, tearing about in one
continual frenzy. Suddenly three, even four appear at the same time;
they are nothing more than the four limbs of the outstretched man,
whose legs and arms, raised on high, are each one dressed up, and
capped with a wig under which peers a mask; between these phantoms
tremendous fighting and battling take place, and many a sword-thrust
is exchanged. The most fearful of all is a certain puppet representing
an hag; every time she appears, with her weird head and ghastly grin,
the lights burn low, the music of the accompanying orchestra moans
forth a sinister strain given by the flutes, mingled with a rattling
tremolo which sounds like the clatter of bones. This creature
evidently plays an ugly part in the piece,--that of a horrible old
ghoul, spiteful and famished. Still more appalling than her person is
her shadow, which, projected upon a white screen, is abnormally and
vividly distinct; by means of some unknown process this shadow, which
nevertheless follows all her movements, assumes the aspect of a wolf.
At a given moment the hag turns round and presents the profile of her
distorted snub nose as she accepts the bowl of rice which is offered
to her; on the screen at the very same instant appears the elongated
outline of the wolf, with its pointed ears, its muzzle and chops, its
great teeth and hanging tongue. The orchestra grinds, wails, quivers;
then suddenly bursts out into funereal shrieks, like a concert of
owls; the hag is now eating, and her wolfish shadow is eating also,
greedily moving its jaws and nibbling at another shadow easy to
recognize,--the arm of a little child.

We now go on to see the _great salamander_ of Japan, an animal rare
in this country, and quite unknown elsewhere, a great cold mass;
sluggish and benumbed, looking like some antediluvian _experiment_,
forgotten in the inner seas of this archipelago.

Next comes the trained elephant, the terror of our mousmés, the
equilibrists, the menagerie.

It is one o'clock in the morning before we are back at Diou-djen-dji.

We first get Yves to bed in the little paper room he has already once
occupied. Then we go to bed ourselves, after the inevitable
preparations, the smoking of the little pipe, and the _pan! pan! pan!
pan!_ on the edge of the box.

Suddenly Yves begins to move restlessly in his sleep, to toss about,
giving great kicks on the wall, and making a frightful noise.

What can be the matter? I at once imagine that he must be dreaming of
the old hag and her wolfish shadow. Chrysanthème raises herself on her
elbow and listens, with astonishment depicted on her face.

Ah! happy thought! she has discovered what is tormenting him:

"Ka!" (mosquitoes) she says.

And, to impress the more forcibly her meaning on my mind, she pinches
my arm so hard with her little pointed nails, at the same time
imitating, with such an amusing play of her features, the grimace of a
person who is stung, that I exclaim--

"Oh! stop, Chrysanthème, this pantomime is too expressive, and indeed
useless! I know the word _Ka_, and had quite understood, I assure
you."

It is done so drolly and so quickly, with such a pretty pout, that in
truth I cannot think of being angry, although I shall certainly have
to-morrow a blue mark on my arm; about that there is no doubt.

"Come, we must get up and go to Yves' rescue; he cannot be allowed to
go on thumping in that manner. Let us take a lantern, and see what has
happened."

It was indeed the mosquitoes. They are hovering in a thick cloud about
him; those of the house and those of the garden all seem collected
together, swarming and buzzing. Chrysanthème indignantly burns several
at the flame of her lantern, and shows me others: "Hou!" covering the
white paper walls.

He, tired out with his day's amusement, sleeps on; but his slumbers
are restless, as can be easily imagined. Chrysanthème gives him a
shake, wishing him to get up and share our blue mosquito net.

After a little pressing he does as he is bid and follows us, looking
like an overgrown boy only half awake. I make no objection to this
singular hospitality; after all, it looks so little like a bed, the
matting we are to share, and we sleep in our clothes, as we always do
according to the Niponese fashion. After all, on a journey in a
railway, do not the most estimable ladies stretch themselves without
demur by the side of gentlemen unknown to them?

I have however placed Chrysanthème's little wooden block in the center
of the gauze tent, between our two pillows.

Then, without saying a word, in a dignified manner as though she were
rectifying an error of etiquette that I had inadvertently committed,
Chrysanthème takes up her piece of wood, putting in its place my
snake-skin drum; I shall therefore be in the middle between the two.
It is really more correct, decidedly much more proper; Chrysanthème is
evidently a very decorous young person.

Returning on board next morning, in the clear morning sun, we walk
through pathways full of dew; accompanied by a band of funny little
mousmés of six or eight years of age, who are going off to school.

Needless to say that the cicalas around us keep up their perpetual
sonorous chirping. The mountain smells delicious. The atmosphere, the
dawning day, the infantine grace of these little girls in their long
frocks and shiny chignons, all is redundant with freshness and youth.
The flowers and grasses on which we tread sparkle with dewdrops,
exhaling a perfume of freshness. What undying beauty there is, even in
Japan, in the first fresh morning hours in the country, and the
dawning hours of life!

Besides, I am quite ready to admit the attractiveness of the little
Japanese children; some of them are most fascinating. But how is it
that their charm vanishes so rapidly and is so quickly replaced by the
elderly grimace, the smiling ugliness, the monkeyish face?




XXXV.


My mother-in-law Madame Renoncule's small garden is, without
exception, one of the most melancholy spots I have seen during all my
peregrinations through the world.

Oh, the slow, enervating, dull hours spent in idle and diffuse
conversation in the dimly lighted verandah! Oh, the horrid peppered
jam in the microscopic pots! In the middle of the town, enclosed by
four walls, is this park of five yards square, with little lakes,
little mountains, and little rocks, where all wears an antiquated
appearance, and everything is covered with a greenish moldiness from
want of sun.

Nevertheless a true feeling for nature has inspired this tiny
representation of a wild spot. The rocks are well placed, the dwarf
cedars, no taller than cabbages, stretch their gnarled boughs over the
valleys in the attitude of giants wearied by the weight of centuries;
and their look of _big trees_ perplexes one and falsifies the
perspective. When from the dark recesses of the apartment one
perceives at a certain distance this diminutive landscape dimly
lighted up, the wonder is whether it is all artificial, or whether one
is not oneself the victim of some morbid illusion; and if it is not
indeed a real country view seen through a distorted vision out of
focus, or through the wrong end of a telescope.

To any one familiar with Japanese life my mother-in-law's house in
itself reveals a refined nature,--complete nudity, two or three
screens placed here and there, a teapot, a vase full of lotus-flowers,
and nothing more. Woodwork devoid of paint or varnish, but carved in
most elaborate and capricious openwork, the whiteness of the pinewood
being kept up by constant scrubbings of soap and water. The posts and
beams of the framework are varied by the most fanciful taste: some are
cut in precise geometrical forms; others artificially twisted,
imitating trunks of old trees covered with tropical creepers.
Everywhere little hiding-places, little nooks, little closets
concealed in the most ingenious and unexpected manner under the
immaculate uniformity of the white paper panels.

I cannot help smiling when I think of some of the so-called _Japanese_
drawing-rooms, overcrowded with knick-knacks and curios and hung with
coarse gold embroideries on exported satins, of our Parisian fine
ladies. I would advise those persons to come and look at the houses of
people of taste out here; to visit the white solitudes of the palaces
at Yeddo. In France we have works of art in order to enjoy them; here
they possess them merely to ticket them and lock them up carefully in
a kind of mysterious underground room shut in by iron gratings called
a _godoun_. On rare occasions, only to honor some visitor of
distinction, do they open this impenetrable depositary. The true
Japanese manner of understanding luxury consists in a scrupulous and
indeed almost excessive cleanliness, white mats and white woodwork;
an appearance of extreme simplicity, and an incredible nicety in the
most infinitesimal details.

My mother-in-law seems to be really a very nice woman, and were it not
for the insurmountable feeling of spleen the sight of her garden
produces on me, I would often go and see her. She has nothing in
common with the mammas of Jonquille, Campanule or Touki: she is vastly
their superior; and then I can see that she has been very good-looking
and stylish. Her past life puzzles me; but in my position as a
son-in-law, good manners prevent my making further inquiries.

Some assert that she was formerly a celebrated guécha in Yeddo, who
lost public favor by her folly in becoming a mother. This would
account for her daughter's talent on the guitar; she had probably
herself taught her the touch and style of the Conservatory.

Since the birth of Chrysanthème (her eldest child and first cause of
this loss of favor), my mother-in-law, an expansive although
distinguished nature, has fallen seven times into the same fatal
error, and I have two little sisters-in-law: Mdlle. La Neige,[G] and
Mdlle. La Lune,[H] as well as five little brothers-in-law: Cerisier,
Pigeon, Liseron, Or, and Bambou.

[Footnote G: In Japanese: _Oyouki-San_ (like Madame Prune's
daughter).]

[Footnote H: In Japanese: _Tsouki-San_.]

Little Bambou is four years old,--a yellow baby, fat and round all
over, with fine bright eyes; coaxing and jolly, sleeping whenever he
is not laughing. Of all my Niponese family, Bambou is the one I love
the most.




XXXVI.

_Tuesday, August 27th_.


We have spent the day,--Yves, Chrysanthème, Oyouki and
myself,--wandering through dark and dusty nooks, dragged hither and
thither by four quick-footed djins, in search of antiquities in the
bric-à-brac shops.

Towards sunset, Chrysanthème, who has wearied me more than ever since
the morning, and who doubtless has perceived it, pulls a very long
face, declares herself ill, and begs leave to spend the night at her
mother's, Madame Renoncule.

I agree to this with the best grace in the world; let her go, tiresome
little mousmé! Oyouki will carry a message to her parents, who will
shut up our rooms; we shall spend the evening, Yves and I, in roaming
about as fancy takes us, without any mousmé dragging at our heels, and
shall afterwards regain our own quarters on board the _Triomphante_,
without having the trouble of climbing up that hill.

First of all, we make an attempt to dine together in some fashionable
tea-house. Impossible, there is not a place to be had; all the absurd
paper rooms, all the compartments contrived by so many ingenious
dodges of slipping and sliding panels, all the nooks and corners in
the little gardens are filled with Japanese men and women eating
impossible and incredible little dishes! numberless young dandies are
dining _tête-à-tête_ with the lady of their choice, and sounds of
dancing girls and music issue from the private rooms.

The fact is, that to-day is the third and last day of the great
pilgrimage to the temple of the _Jumping Tortoise_, of which we saw
the commencement yesterday, and all Nagasaki is at this time given
over to amusement.

At the tea-house of the _Indescribable Butterflies_, which is also
full to overflowing, but where we are well-known, they have had the
bright idea of throwing a temporary flooring over the little
lake,--the pond where the gold-fish live, and it is here that our meal
is served, in the pleasant freshness of the fountain which continues
its murmur under our feet.

After dinner, we follow the faithful and ascend again to the temple.

Up there we find the same elfin revelry, the same masks, the same
music. We seat ourselves, as before, under a gauze tent and sip odd
little drinks tasting of flowers. But this evening we are alone, and
the absence of the band of mousmés, whose familiar little faces formed
a bond of union between this holiday-making people and ourselves,
separates and isolates us more than usual from the profusion of
oddities in the midst of which we seem to be lost. Beneath us, lies
always the immense blue background: Nagasaki illumined by moonlight,
and the expanse of silvered, glittering water, which seems like a
vaporous vision suspended in mid-air. Behind us is the great open
temple, where the bonzes officiate to the accompaniment of sacred
bells and wooden clappers,--looking, from where we sit, more like
puppets than anything else, some squatting in rows like peaceful
mummies, others executing rhythmical marches before the golden
background where stand the gods. We do not laugh to-night, and speak
but little, more forcibly struck by the scene than we were on the
first night; we only look on, trying to understand. Suddenly, Yves
turning round, says:

"Hullo! brother, your mousmé!!"

Actually there she is, behind him; Chrysanthème almost on all fours,
hidden between the paws of a great granite beast, half tiger, half
dog, against which our fragile tent is leaning.

"She pulled my trousers with her nails, for all the world like a
little cat," said Yves, still full of surprise, "positively like a
cat!"

She remains bent double in the most humble form of salutation; she
smiles timidly, afraid of being ill received, and the head of my
little brother-in-law, Bambou, appears smiling too, just above her
own. She has brought this little _mousko_[I] with her, perched astride
on her back; he looks as absurd as ever, with his shaven head, his
long frock and the great bows of his silken sash. There they both
stand gazing at us, anxious to know how their joke will be taken.

[Footnote I: _Mousko_ is the masculine of _mousmé_, and signifies
little boy. Excessive politeness makes it _mousko-san_ (Mr. little
boy).]

For my part, I have not the least idea of giving them a cold
reception; on the contrary, the meeting amuses me. It even strikes me
that it is rather pretty of Chrysanthème to come round in this way,
and to bring Bambou-San to the festival; though it savors somewhat of
her low breeding, to tell the truth, to have tacked him on to her
back, as the poorer Japanese women do with their little ones.

However, let her sit down between Yves and myself: and let them bring
her those iced beans she loves so much; and we will take the jolly
little _mousko_ on our knees and cram him with sugar and sweetness to
his heart's content.

       *       *       *       *       *

The evening over, when we begin to think of leaving, and of going down
again, Chrysanthème replaces her little Bambou astride upon her back,
and sets forth, bending forward under his weight and painfully
dragging her Cinderella slippers over the granite steps and
flagstones. Yes, decidedly low this conduct! but low in the best sense
of the word: nothing in it displeases me; I even consider
Chrysanthème's affection for Bambou-San engaging and attractive in its
simplicity.

One cannot deny this merit to the Japanese,--a great love for little
children, and a talent for amusing them, for making them laugh,
inventing comical toys for them, making the morning of their life
happy; for a specialty in dressing them, arranging their heads, and
giving to the whole little personage the most diverting appearance
possible. It is the only thing I really like about this country: the
babies and the manner in which they are understood.

       *       *       *       *       *

On our way we meet our married friends of the _Triomphante_, who, much
surprised at seeing me with this _mousko_, chaffingly exclaim:

"What! a son already?"

Down in the town, we make a point of bidding good-by to Chrysanthème
at the turning of the street where her mother lives. She smiles
undecided, declares herself well again, and begs to return to our
house on the heights. This did not precisely enter into my plans, I
confess. However, it would look very ungracious to refuse.

So be it! But we must carry the _mousko_ home to his mamma, and then
begin, by the flickering light of a new lantern bought afresh from
Madame Très-Propre, our weary homeward ascent.

Here, however, we find ourselves in another predicament: this
ridiculous little Bambou insists upon coming with us! No, he will take
no denial, we must take him with us. This is out of all reason, quite
impossible!

However, it will not do to make him cry, on the night of a great
festival too, poor little _mousko_. So we must send a message to
Madame Renoncule, that she may not be uneasy about him, and as there
will soon not be a living creature on the footpaths of Diou-djen-dji
to laugh at us, we will take it in turn, Yves and I, to carry him on
our back, all the way up that climb in the darkness.

       *       *       *       *       *

And here am I, who did not wish to return this way to-night, dragging
a mousmé by the hand, actually carrying an extra burden in the shape
of a _mousko_ on my back. What an irony of fate!

As I had expected, all our shutters and doors are closed, bolted and
barred; no one expects us, and we have to make a prodigious noise at
the door. Chrysanthème sets to work and calls with all her might:

"Ho! Oumé-San-an-an-an!" (In English: "Hi! Madame Pru-u-u-u-une!")

These intonations in her little voice are unknown to me; her longdrawn
call in the echoing darkness of midnight has so strange an accent,
something so unexpected and wild, that it impresses me with a dismal
feeling of far-off exile.

At last Madame Prune appears to open the door to us, only half awake
and much astonished; by way of a night-cap she wears a monstrous
cotton turban, on the blue ground of which a few white storks are
playfully disporting themselves. Holding in the tips of her fingers
with an affectation of graceful fright, the long stalk of her
beflowered lantern, she gazes intently into our faces, one after
another, to assure herself of our identity; but the poor old lady
cannot get over the _mousko_ I am carrying.




XXXVII


At first it was only to Chrysanthème's guitar that I listened with
pleasure: now I am beginning to like her singing also.

She has nothing of the theatrical, or the deep assumed voice of the
virtuoso; on the contrary, her notes, always very high, are soft,
thin, and plaintive.

She will often teach Oyouki some romance, slow and dreamy, which she
has composed, or which comes back to her mind. Then they both astonish
me, for on their well-tuned guitars they will search out
accompaniments in parts, and try again each time that the chords are
not perfectly true to their ear, without ever losing themselves in the
confusion of these dissonant harmonies, always weird and always
melancholy.

Generally, while their music is going on, I am writing in the
verandah, with the superb stretched out in front of me. I write,
seated on a mat on the floor and leaning upon a little Japanese desk,
ornamented with swallows in relief; my ink is Chinese, my ink-stand,
just like that of my landlord, is in jade, with dear little frogs and
toads carved on the rim. In short, I am writing my memoirs,--exactly
as M. Sucre does downstairs! Occasionally I fancy I resemble him--a
very disagreeable fancy.

My memoirs,--composed of incongruous details, minute observations of
colors, shapes, scents, and sounds.

It is true that a complete imbroglio, worthy of a romance, seems ever
threatening to appear upon my monotonous horizon; a regular intrigue
seems ever ready to explode in the midst of this little world of
mousmés and grasshoppers: Chrysanthème in love with Yves; Yves with
Chrysanthème; Oyouki with me; I with no one. We might even find here,
ready to hand, the elements of a fratricidal drama, were we in any
other country than Japan; but we are in Japan, and under the narrowing
and dwarfing influence of the surroundings, which turn everything into
ridicule, nothing will come of it all.




XXXVIII.


There is, in this good town of Nagasaki, towards five or six o'clock
in the evening, one hour of the day more comical than any other. At
this moment every living being is naked: children, young people, old
people, old men, old women, every one is seated in a tub of some sort,
taking a bath. This takes place no matter where, without the slightest
screen, in the gardens, the courtyards, in the shops, even upon the
thresholds, in order to give greater facility for conversation among
the neighbors from one side of the street to the other. In this
situation visitors are received; and the bather, without any
hesitation, leaves his tub, holding in his hand his little towel
(invariably blue), to offer the caller a seat, and to exchange with
him some amiable remarks. Nevertheless, neither the mousmés nor the
old ladies gain anything by appearing in this primeval costume. A
Japanese woman, deprived of her long dress and her huge sash with its
pretentious bows, is nothing but a diminutive yellow being, with
crooked legs and flat, unshapely bust; she has no longer a remnant of
her artificial little charms, which have completely disappeared in
company with her costume.

There is yet another hour, at once joyous and melancholy, a little
later when twilight falls, when the sky seems one vast veil of yellow,
against which stand the clear-cut outlines of jagged mountains and
lofty, fantastic pagodas. It is the hour at which, in the labyrinth of
little gray streets down below, the sacred lamps begin to twinkle in
the ever-open houses, in front of the ancestors' altars and the
familiar Buddhas; while outside, darkness creeps over all, and the
thousand and one indentations and peaks of the old roofs are depicted,
as if in black festoons, on the clear golden sky. At this moment,
there suddenly passes over merry, laughing Japan a somber shadow,
strange, weird, a breath of antiquity, of savagery, of something
indefinable, which casts a gloom of sadness. And then the only gayety
that remains is the gayety of the population of young children, of
little mouskos and little mousmés, who spread themselves like a wave
through the streets filled with shadow, as they swarm out from schools
and workshops. On the dark background of all these wooden buildings,
the little blue and scarlet dresses stand out in startling
contrast,--drolly bedizened, drolly draped; and the fine loops of the
sashes, the flowers, the silver or gold top-knots stuck in these baby
chignons, add to the vivid effect.

They amuse themselves, they chase each other, their great pagoda
sleeves fly widely open, and these tiny little mousmés of ten, of five
years old, or even younger still, have lofty head-dresses and imposing
bows of hair arranged on their little heads, like grown-up women. Oh!
what loves of supremely absurd dolls at this hour of twilight gambol
through the streets, in their long frocks, blowing their crystal
trumpets, or running with all their might to start their fanciful
kites. This juvenile world of Japan--ludicrous by birth, and fated to
become more so as the years roll on--starts in life with singular
amusements, with strange cries and shouts; its playthings are somewhat
ghastly, and would frighten the children of other countries; even the
kites have great squinting eyes and vampire shapes.

And every evening, in the little dark streets, bursts forth this
overflow of joyousness, fresh, childish, but withal grotesque to
excess. It would be difficult to have any idea of the incredible
things which, carried by the wind, float in the evening air.




XXXIX.


Little Chrysanthème is always arrayed in dark colors, a sign here of
aristocratic distinction. While her friends Oyouki-San, Madame Touki
and others delight in loud-striped stuffs, and stick gorgeous
ornaments in their chignons, she always wears navy-blue or neutral
gray, fastened round her waist with great black sashes brocaded in
tender shades, and puts nothing in her hair but amber-colored
tortoise-shell pins. If she were of noble descent she would wear
embroidered on her dress in the middle of the back a little white
circle looking like a postmark with some design in the center of
it--the leaf of a tree generally; and this would be her coat of arms.
There is really nothing wanting but this little heraldic blazon on the
back to give her the appearance of a lady of the highest position.

In Japan the smart dresses of bright colors shaded in clouds,
embroidered with monsters of gold or silver, are reserved by the great
ladies for home use on state occasions; or else they are used on the
stage for the dancers and the courtesans.

Like all Japanese women, Chrysanthème carries a quantity of things in
her long sleeves, in which pockets are cunningly hidden. There she
keeps letters, various notes written on delicate sheets of rice-paper,
prayer amulets drawn up by the bonzes; and above all a number of
squares of a silky paper which she puts to the most unexpected
uses,--to dry a tea-cup, to hold the damp stalk of a flower, or to
blow her quaint little nose, when the necessity presents itself. After
the operation she at once crumples up the piece of paper, rolls it
into a ball, and throws it out of the window with disgust.

The very smartest people in Japan blow their noses in this manner.




XL.

_September 2nd_.


Chance has favored us with a friendship as singular as it is rare:
that of the head bonzes of the temple of the _Jumping Tortoise_, where
we had witnessed last month such a surprising pilgrimage.

The approach to this place is as solitary now as it was thronged and
bustling on the evenings of the festival; and in broad daylight one is
surprised at the deathlike decay of the religious surroundings which
at night had seemed so full of life. Not a creature to be seen on the
time-worn granite steps; not a creature beneath the vast sumptuous
porticoes; the colors, the gold-work are dim with dust. To reach the
temple one must cross several deserted courtyards terraced on the
mountain side, pass through several solemn gateways, and up and up
endless stairs, rising far above the town and the noises of humanity
into a sacred region filled with innumerable tombs. On all the
pavements, in all the walls, lichen and stonecrop; and over all the
gray tint of extreme age spreads everywhere like a fall of ashes.

In a side temple near the entrance is enthroned a colossal Buddha
seated in his lotus--a gilded idol some forty-five or sixty feet high,
mounted on an enormous pedestal of bronze.

At length appears the last doorway with the two traditional giants,
guardians of the sacred court, which stand the one on the right hand,
the other on the left, shut up like wild beasts each one in a cage of
iron. They are in attitudes of fury, with fists upraised as if to
strike, and features atrociously fierce and distorted. Their bodies
are covered all over with bullets of crumbled paper which have been
aimed at them through the bars, and which have stuck to their
monstrous limbs like a white leprosy: this is the manner in which the
faithful strive to appease them, by conveying to them their prayers
written upon delicate leaflets by the pious bonzes.

Passing between these alarming scarecrows one reaches the innermost
court. The residence of our friends is on the right, the great hall of
the pagoda is before us.

In this paved court are bronze torch-holders as high as turrets. Here
too stand, and have stood for centuries, cyca palms with fresh green
plumes, their numerous stalks curving with a heavy symmetry, like the
branches of massive candelabra. The temple, which is open along its
entire length, is dark and mysterious, with touches of gilding in
distant corners melting away into the gloom. In the very remotest part
are seated idols, and from outside one can vaguely see their clasped
hands and air of rapt mysticism; in front are the altars, loaded with
marvelous vases in metal-work, whence spring graceful clusters of gold
and silver lotus. From the very entrance one is greeted by the sweet
odor of the incense-sticks unceasingly burnt by the priests before the
gods.

To penetrate into the dwelling of our friends the bonzes, which is
situated on the right hand side as you enter, is by no means an easy
matter.

A monster of the fish tribe, but having claws and horns, is hung over
their door by iron chains; at the least breath of wind he swings
creakingly. We pass beneath him and enter the first immense and lofty
hall, dimly lighted, in the corners of which gleam gilded idols, bells
and incomprehensible objects of religious use.

Quaint little creatures, choir boys or pupils, come forward with a
doubtful welcome to ask what is wanted.

"_Matsou-San!! Donata-San!!_" they repeat, much astonished, when they
understand to whom we wish to be conducted. Oh! no, impossible, they
cannot be seen; they are resting or are in contemplation. "_Orimas!
Orimas!_" say they, clasping their hands and sketching a genuflection
or two to make us understand better. (They are at prayer! the most
profound prayer!)

We insist, speak more imperatively; even slip off our shoes like
people determined to take no refusal.

At last Matsou-San and Donata-San make their appearance from the
tranquil depths of their bonze-house. They are dressed in black crape
and their heads are shaved. Smiling, amiable, full of excuses, they
offer us their hands, and we follow with our feet bare like theirs to
the interior of their mysterious dwelling, through a series of empty
rooms spread with mats of the most unimpeachable whiteness. The
successive halls are separated one from the other only by bamboo
curtains of exquisite delicacy, caught back by tassels and cords of
red silk.

The whole wainscoting of the interior is of the same wood, of a pale
yellow color joinered with extreme nicety, without the least ornament,
the least carving; everything seems new and unused, as though it had
never been touched by human hand. At distant intervals in this studied
bareness, costly little stools, marvelously inlaid, uphold some
antique bronze monster or a vase of flowers; on the walls hang a few
masterly sketches, vaguely tinted in Indian ink, drawn upon strips of
gray paper most accurately cut but without the slightest attempt at a
frame; this is all: not a seat, not a cushion, not a scrap of
furniture. It is the very acme of studied simplicity, of elegance made
out of nothing, of the most immaculate and incredible cleanliness. And
while following the bonzes through this long suite of empty halls, we
are struck by their contrast with the overflow of knick-knacks
scattered about our rooms in France, and we take a sudden dislike to
the profusion and crowding delighted in at home.

The spot where this silent march of barefooted folk comes to an end,
the spot where we are to seat ourselves in the delightful coolness of
a semi-darkness, is an interior verandah opening upon an artificial
site; we might suppose it were the bottom of a well; it is a miniature
garden no bigger than the opening of an _oubliette_, overhung on all
sides by the crushing height of the mountain and receiving from on
high but the dim light of dream-land. Nevertheless here is simulated a
great natural ravine in all its wild grandeur: here are caverns,
abrupt rocks, a torrent, a cascade, islands. The trees, dwarfed by a
Japanese process of which we have not the secret, have tiny little
leaves on their decrepit and knotty branches. A pervading hue of the
mossy green of antiquity harmonizes all this medley, which is
undoubtedly centuries old.

Families of gold-fish swim round and round in the clear water, and
tiny tortoises (_jumpers_ probably) sleep upon the granite islands
which are of the same color as their own gray shell.

There are even blue dragon-flies which have ventured to descend,
heaven knows from whence, and alight with quivering wings upon the
miniature water-lilies.

Our friends the bonzes, notwithstanding an unctuousness of manner
thoroughly ecclesiastical, are very ready to laugh,--a simple,
pleased, childish laughter; plump, chubby, shaven and shorn, they
dearly love our French liqueurs and know how to take a joke.

We talk first of one thing and then another. To the tranquil music of
their little cascade, I launch out before them with phrases of the
most erudite Japanese, I try the effect of a few tenses of verbs:
_desideratives, concessives, hypothetics in ba_. Whilst they chat they
dispatch the affairs of the church, the order of services sealed with
complicated seals for inferior pagodas situated in the neighborhood;
or trace little prayers with a cunning paint-brush as medical remedies
to be swallowed as pills by invalids at a distance. With their white
and dimpled hands they play with a fan as cleverly as any woman, and
when we have tasted different native drinks flavored with essences of
flowers, they bring up as a finish a battle of _Bénédictine_ or
_Chartreuse_, for they appreciate the liqueurs composed by their
Western colleagues.

When they come on board to return our visits, they by no means disdain
to fasten their great round spectacles on their flat noses in order to
inspect the profane drawings in our illustrated papers, the _Vie
Parisienne_ for instance. And it is even with a certain complacency
that they let their fingers linger upon the pictures which represent
the ladies.

The religious ceremonies in their great temple are magnificent, and to
one of these we are now invited. At the sound of the gong they make
their entrance before the idols with a stately ritual; twenty or
thirty priests officiate in gala costumes, with genuflections,
clapping of hands and movements to and fro, which look like the
figures of some mystic quadrille.

But for all that, let the sanctuary be ever so immense and imposing in
its somber gloom, the idols ever so superb, all seems in Japan but a
mere semblance of grandeur. A hopeless pettiness, an irresistible
feeling of the ludicrous, lies at the bottom of all things.


And then the congregation is not conducive to thoughtful
contemplation, for among it we generally discover some acquaintance:
my mother-in-law, or a cousin, or the woman from the china-shop who
sold us a vase only yesterday. Charming little mousmés,
monkeyish-looking old ladies enter with their smoking-boxes, their
gayly-daubed parasols, their curtsies, their little cries and
exclamations; prattling, complimenting each other, full of restless
movement, and having the greatest difficulty in maintaining a serious
demeanor.




XLI.


_September 3rd_.

Chrysanthème, for the first time, paid me a visit on board ship
to-day, chaperoned by Madame Prune, and followed by my youngest
sister-in-law, Mdlle. La Neige. These ladies had the tranquil manners
of the highest gentility.

In my cabin is a great Buddha on his throne, and before him a lacquer
tray, on which my faithful sailor servant places any small change he
may find lying loose in the pockets of my clothes. Madame Prune, whose
mind is much swayed by mysticism, at once supposed herself before a
regular altar; in the gravest manner possible she addressed a brief
prayer to the god; then, drawing out her purse (which, according to
custom, was attached to her sash behind her back, along with her
little pipe and tobacco-pouch), placed a pious offering in the tray,
while executing a low curtsey.

They remained on their best behavior all through the visit. But when
the moment of departure came, Chrysanthème, who would not go away
without seeing Yves, asked for him with a thinly-veiled persistency
which was remarkable. Yves, for whom I then sent, made himself
particularly charming to her, so much so, that this time I felt a
shade of more serious annoyance; I even asked myself whether the
laughably pitiable ending, which I had hitherto vaguely foreseen,
might not, after all, soon break upon us.




XLII.


_September 4th_.

I met yesterday, in an old and ruined quarter of the town, a perfectly
exquisite mousmé, charmingly dressed; a fresh note of color against
the dark background of decayed buildings.

It was quite at the farthest end of Nagasaki, in the most ancient part
of the town. In this region are trees centuries old, ancient temples
of Buddha, of Amiddah, of Benten, or Kwanon, with steep and pompous
roofs; monsters carved in granite sit there in courtyards silent as
the grave, where the grass grows between the paving-stones. This
deserted quarter is traversed by a narrow torrent running in a deep
channel, across which are thrown little curved bridges with granite
balustrades eaten away by lichen. All the objects there wear the
strange grimace, the quaint arrangement familiar to us in the most
antique Japanese drawings.

I walked through it all at the burning hour of midday, and saw not a
soul, unless indeed, through the open windows of the bonze-houses, I
caught sight of some priests, guardians of tombs or sanctuaries,
taking their siesta under their dark-blue gauze nets.

All at once this little mousmé appeared, a little above me, just at
the point of the arch of one of these bridges carpeted with gray moss;
she was in full light, in full sunshine, and stood out in brilliant
clearness, like a fairy vision, against the background of old black
temples and deep shadows. She was holding her dress together with one
hand, gathering it close round her ankles to give herself an air of
greater slimness. Over her quaint little head, her round umbrella with
its thousand ribs threw a great halo of blue and red, edged with
black, and an oleander full of flowers growing among the stones of the
bridge spread its glory beside her, bathed, like herself, in the
sunshine. Behind this youthful figure and this flowering shrub all was
blackness. Upon the pretty red and blue parasol great white letters
formed this inscription, much used among the mousmés, and which I
have learned to recognize: _Stop! clouds, to see her pass by_. And it
was really worth the trouble to stop and look at this exquisite little
person, of a type so ideally Japanese.

However, it will not do to stop too long and be ensnared,--it would
only be another take-in. A doll like the rest, evidently, an ornament
for a china shelf, and nothing more. While I gaze at her, I say to
myself that Chrysanthème, appearing in this same place, with this
dress, this play of light, and this aureole of sunshine, would produce
just as delightful an effect.

For Chrysanthème is pretty, there can be no doubt about it. Yesterday
evening, in fact, I positively admired her. It was quite night; we
were returning with the usual escort of little married couples like
our own, from the inevitable tour of the tea-houses and bazaars. While
the other mousmés walked along hand in hand, adorned with new silver
top-knots which they had succeeded in having presented to them, and
amusing themselves with playthings, she, pleading fatigue, followed,
half reclining, in a djin carriage. We had placed beside her great
bunches of flowers destined to fill our vases, late iris and
long-stemmed lotus, the last of the season, already smelling of
autumn. And it was really very pretty to see this Japanese girl in her
little car, lying carelessly among all these water-flowers, lighted by
gleams of ever-changing colors, as they chanced from the lanterns we
met or passed. If, on the evening of my arrival in Japan, any one had
pointed her out to me, and said: "That shall be your mousmé," there
cannot be a doubt I should have been charmed. In reality, however, no,
I am not charmed; it is only Chrysanthème, always Chrysanthème,
nothing but Chrysanthème: a mere plaything to laugh at, a little
creature of finical forms and thoughts, that the agency of M.
Kangourou has supplied me with.




XLIII.


In our house, the water used for drinking, making tea, and lesser
washing purposes, is kept in large white china tubs, decorated with
paintings representing blue fish borne along by a swift current
through distorted rushes. In order to keep them cool, the tubs are
placed out of doors on Madame Prune's roof, at a place where we can,
from the top of our projecting balcony, easily reach them by
stretching out the arm. A real godsend for all the thirsty cats in
the neighborhood on the fine summer nights is this corner of the roof
with our bedaubed tubs, and it proves a delightful trysting-place for
them, after all their caterwauling and long solitary rambles on the
top of the walls.

I had thought it my duty to warn Yves the first time he wished to
drink this water.

"Oh!" he replied, rather surprised, "cats do you say? they are not
dirty!"

On this point Chrysanthème and I agree with him: we do not consider
cats as unclean animals, and we do not object to drink after them.

Yves considers Chrysanthème much in the same light. "She is not dirty,
either," he says; and he willingly drinks after her, out of the same
cup, putting her in the same category with the cats.

Well, these china tubs are one of the daily preoccupations of our
household: in the evening, when we return from our walk, after the
clamber up which makes us thirsty, and Madame L'Heure's waffles, which
we have been eating to beguile the way, we always find them empty. It
seems impossible for Madame Prune, or Mdlle. Oyouki, or their young
servant Mdlle. Dédé,[J] to have forethought enough to fill them while
it is still daylight. And when we are late in returning home, these
three ladies are asleep, so we are obliged to attend to the business
ourselves.

[Footnote J: _Dédé-San_ means "Miss Young Girl," a very common name.]

We must therefore open all the closed doors, put on our boots, and go
down into the garden to draw water.

As Chrysanthème would die of fright all alone in the dark, in the
midst of the trees and buzzing of the insects, I am obliged to
accompany her to the well. For this expedition we require a light, and
must seek among the quantity of lanterns purchased at Madame
Très-Propre's booth, which have been thrown night after night into the
bottom of one of our little paper closets; but alas, all the candles
are burnt down; I thought as much! Well, we must resolutely take the
first lantern to hand, and stick a fresh candle on the iron point at
the bottom; Chrysanthème puts forth all her strength, the candle
splits, breaks; the mousmé pricks her fingers, pouts and whimpers.
Such is the inevitable scene that takes place every evening, and
delays our retiring to rest under the dark blue gauze net for a good
quarter of an hour; while the cicalas on the roof seem to mock us with
their ceaseless song.

All this, which I should find amusing in any one else,--any one I
loved--provokes me in her.




XLIV.


_September 11th_.

A week has passed by peacefully enough, during which I have written
down nothing.

Little by little I am becoming accustomed to my Japanese household, to
the strangeness of the language, costumes, and faces. For the last
three weeks, no letters have arrived from Europe; they have no doubt
miscarried, and their absence contributes, as is usually the case, to
throw a veil of oblivion over the past.

Every day, therefore, I faithfully climb up to my villa, sometimes by
beautiful star-lit nights, sometimes through stormy downpours of rain.
Every morning as the sound of Madame Prune's chanted prayer rises
through the reverberating air, I awake and go down towards the sea, by
the grassy pathways full of dew.

The chief occupation of this Japanese country, seems to be a perpetual
hunt after curios. We sit down on the mattings, in the
antique-sellers' little booths, take a cup of tea with the salesmen,
and rummage with our own hands in the cupboards and chests, where many
a fantastic piece of old rubbish is huddled away. The bargaining,
much discussed, is laughingly carried on for several days, as though
we were trying to play off some excellent little practical joke upon
each other.

I really make a sad abuse of the adjective _little_, I am quite aware
of it, but how can I do otherwise? In describing this country, the
temptation is great to use it ten times in every written line. Little,
finical, affected,--all Japan is contained, both physically and
morally, in these three words.

My purchases are accumulating up there, in my little wood and paper
house; but how much more Japanese it really was, in its bare
emptiness, such as M. Sucre and Madame Prune had conceived it. There
are now many lamps of a religious shape hanging from the ceiling; many
stools and many vases, as many gods and goddesses as in a pagoda.

There is even a little Shintoist altar, before which Madame Prune has
not been able to restrain her feelings, and before which she has
fallen down and chanted her prayers in her bleating old nanny-goat
voice:

"Wash me clean from all my impurity, oh Ama-Térace-Omi-Kami, as one
washes away uncleanness in the river of Kamo."

Alas for poor Ama-Térace-Omi-Kami to have to wash away the impurities
of Madame Prune! What a tedious and ungrateful task!!

Chrysanthème, who is a Buddhist, prays sometimes in the evening before
lying down; although overcome with sleep, she prays clapping her hands
before the largest of our gilded idols. But she smiles with a childish
disrespect for her Buddha, directly her prayer is ended. I know that
she has also a certain veneration for her _Ottokés_ (the Spirits of
her ancestors), whose rather sumptuous altar is set up at her
mother's, Madame Renoncule's. She asks for their blessings, for
fortune and wisdom.

Who can make out her ideas about the gods, or about death? Does she
possess a soul? Does she think she has one? Her religion is an obscure
chaos of theogonies as old as the world, treasured up out of respect
for ancient customs; and of more recent ideas about the blessed final
annihilation, imported from India at the epoch of our middle ages by
saintly Chinese missionaries. The bonzes themselves are puzzled; what
a muddle, therefore, must not all this become, when jumbled together
in the childish brain of a sleepy mousmé?

Two very insignificant episodes have somewhat attached me to
her--(bonds of this kind seldom fail to draw closer in the end). The
first occasion was as follows:--

Madame Prune one day brought forth a relic of her gay youth, a
tortoiseshell comb of rare transparency, one of those combs that it is
good style to place on the summit of the head, lightly poised,
scarcely stuck at all in the air, with all the teeth showing. Taking
it out of a pretty little lacquered box, she held it up in the air and
blinked her eyes, looking through it at the sky--a bright summer
sky--as one does to examine the quality of a precious stone.

"Here is," she said, "an object of great value that you should offer
to your little wife."

My mousmé, very much taken by it, admired the clearness of the comb
and its graceful shape.

The lacquered box, however, pleased me most. On the cover was a
wonderful painting in gold on gold, representing a field of rice, seen
very close, on a windy day: a tangle of ears and grass beaten down and
twisted by a terrible squall; here and there, between the distorted
stalks, the muddy earth of the rice-swamp was visible; there were even
little pools of water, produced by bits of the transparent lacquer on
which tiny particles of gold seemed to float about like chaff in a
thick liquid; two or three insects, which required a microscope to be
well seen, were clinging in a terrified manner to the rushes, and the
whole picture was no larger than a woman's hand.

As for Madame Prune's comb, I confess it left me indifferent, and I
turned a deaf ear, thinking it very insignificant and expensive. Then
Chrysanthème answered mournfully:

"No, thank you, I don't want it; take it away, dear Madame Prune."

And at the same time she heaved a deep sigh, full of meaning, which
plainly said:

"He is not so fond of me as all that.--Useless to bother him."

I immediately made the wished-for purchase.

Later on, when Chrysanthème will have become an old monkey like Madame
Prune, with her black teeth and long orisons, she, in her turn, will
retail that comb to some fine lady of a fresh generation.

On another occasion the sun had given me a headache; I lay on the
floor resting my head on my snake-skin pillow. My eyes were dim, and
everything appeared to turn round: the open verandah, the big expanse
of luminous evening sky, and a variety of kites hovering against its
background; I felt myself vibrating painfully to the rhythmical sound
of the cicalas which filled the atmosphere.

She, crouching down by my side, strove to relieve me by a Japanese
process, pressing with all her might on my temples with her little
thumbs and turning them rapidly round, as though she were boring a
hole with a gimlet. She had become quite hot and red over this hard
work, which procured me real comfort, something similar to the dreamy
intoxication of opium.

Then, anxious and fearful lest I should have an attack of fever, she
rolled into a pellet and thrust into my mouth a very efficacious
prayer written on rice-paper, which she carefully kept in the lining
of one of her sleeves.

Well, I swallowed that prayer without a smile, anxious not to hurt her
feelings or shake her funny little faith.




XLV.


To-day, Yves, my mousmé and myself went to the best photographer in
Nagasaki, to be taken in a group together.

We shall send the photograph to France. Yves already smiles as he
thinks of his wife's astonishment when she sees Chrysanthème's little
face between us two, and he wonders what explanation he will give her.

"Well, I will just say it is one of your friends, that's all!"

There are, in Japan, photographers in the style of our own, with this
one difference, that they are Japanese, and inhabit Japanese houses.
The one we design to honor to-day carries on his profession in the
suburbs, in that ancient quarter of big trees and gloomy pagodas
where, the other day, I met the pretty little mousmé. His signboard,
written in several languages, is stuck up against a wall on the edge
of the little torrent which, rushing down from the green mountain
above, is crossed by many a curved bridge of old granite and lined on
either side by light bamboos or oleanders in full bloom.

It is astonishing and puzzling to find a photographer perched there,
in the very heart of old Japan.

We have come at the wrong moment; there is a file of people at the
door. Long rows of djins' cars are stationed there, awaiting the
customers they have brought, who will all have their turn before us.
The runners, naked and tatooed, carefully combed in sleek bands and
shiny chignons, are chatting together, smoking little pipes, or
bathing their muscular legs in the fresh water of the torrent.

The courtyard is irreproachably Japanese, with its lanterns and dwarf
trees. But the studio where one sits might be in Paris or Pontoise;
the self-same chair in "old oak," the same faded "poufs," plaster
columns and pasteboard rocks.

The people who are being _taken_ at this moment are two ladies of
quality, evidently mother and daughter, who are sitting together for a
cabinet-sized portrait, with accessories of Louis XV. time. A strange
group this, the first great ladies of this country I have seen so
near, with their long aristocratic faces, dull, lifeless, almost gray
by dint of rice-powder, and their mouths painted heart-shape in vivid
carmine. Withal an undeniable look of good breeding that strongly
impresses us, notwithstanding the intrinsic differences of races and
acquired notions.

They scanned Chrysanthème with an obvious look of scorn, although her
costume was as ladylike as their own. For my part, I could not take my
eyes off these two creatures; they captivated me like incomprehensible
things that one had never seen before. Their fragile bodies,
outlandishly graceful in posture, are lost in stiff materials and
redundant sashes, of which the ends droop like tired wings. They make
me think, I know not why, of great rare insects; the extraordinary
patterns on their garments have something of the dark motley of
night-moths. Above all, the mystery of their tiny slits of eyes,
drawn back and up so far that the tight-drawn lids can scarcely open;
the mystery of their expression, which seems to denote inner thoughts
of a silly, vague, complacent absurdity, a world of ideas absolutely
closed to ourselves. And I think as I gaze at them: "How far we are
from this Japanese people! how utterly dissimilar are our races!"

Then we have to let several English sailors pass before us, decked out
in their white drill clothes, fresh, fat and pink like little sugar
figures, who attitudinize in a sheepish manner round the shafts of the
columns.

At last it is our turn; Chrysanthème slowly settles herself in a very
affected style, turning in the points of her toes as much as possible,
according to the fashion.

And on the negative we are shown we look like a supremely ridiculous
little family drawn up in a line by a common photographer at a fair.




XLVI.

_September 13th_.


This evening Yves is off duty three hours earlier than myself; from
time to time this is the case, according to the arrangement of the
watches. On those occasions he lands the first, and goes up to wait
for me at Diou-djen-dji.

From the deck I can see him through the glasses, climbing up the green
mountain path; he walks with a brisk, rapid step, almost running; what
a hurry he seems in to rejoin little Chrysanthème.

When I arrive, at about nine o'clock, I find him seated on the floor,
in the middle of my rooms, with naked torso (this is here a
sufficiently proper costume for private life, I admit). Around him are
grouped Chrysanthème, Oyouki, and Mdlle. Dédé the maid, all eagerly
rubbing his back with little blue towels decorated with storks and
humorous subjects.

Good heavens, what can he have been doing to be so hot, and have put
himself in such a state?

He tells me that near our house, a little higher up the mountain, he
has discovered a fencing gallery: that till nightfall he had been
engaged in a fencing bout against Japanese, who fought with two-handed
swords, springing like cats, as is the custom of their country. With
his French method of fencing he had given them a thorough good
drubbing. Upon which, with many a low bow, they had shown him their
admiration by bringing him a quantity of nice little iced things to
drink. All this combined had thrown him into a fearful perspiration.

Ah, very well. Nevertheless this did not quite explain to me.

He is delighted with his evening; intends to go and amuse himself
every day by beating them; he even thinks of taking pupils.

Once his back dried, they all together, the three mousmés and himself,
play at Japanese "_pigeon vole_." Really I could not wish for anything
more innocent, or more correct in every respect.

Charles N---- and Madame Jonquille his wife, arrived unexpectedly at
about ten o'clock. (They were wandering about in the dark shrubberies
in our neighborhood, and, seeing our lights, came up to us.)

They intend to finish the evening at the tea-house "of the Toads," and
they try to induce us to go and drink some iced sherbets with them. It
is at least an hour's walk from here, on the other side of the town,
half way up the hill, in the gardens of the large pagoda dedicated to
Osueva; but they stick to their idea, pretending that in this clear
night and bright moonlight, we shall have a lovely view from the
terrace of the temple.

Lovely, I have no doubt, but we had intended going to bed. However,
be it so, let us go with them.

We hire five djins and five cars down below, in the principal street,
in front of Madame Très-Propre's shop, who, for this late expedition,
chooses for us her largest round lanterns,--big, red balloons,
decorated with star-fish, seaweed, and green sharks.

It is nearly eleven o'clock when we make our start. In the central
quarters the virtuous Niponese are already closing their little
booths, putting out their lamps, shutting the wooden framework,
drawing their paper panels.

Further on, in the old-fashioned suburban streets, all is shut up long
ago, and our carts roll on through the black night. We cry out to our
djins: "Ayakou! ayakou!" ("Quick! quick!") and they run as hard as
they can, uttering little shrieks, like some merry animal full of wild
gayety. We rush like a whirlwind through the darkness, all five in
Indian file, dashing and jolting over the old uneven flagstones, dimly
lighted up by our red balloons fluttering at the end of their bamboo
stems. From time to time some Niponese, night-capped in his blue
kerchief, opens a window to see who these noisy madcaps can be,
dashing by so rapidly and so late. Or else some faint glimmer, thrown
by us on our passage, discovers the hideous smile of a large stone
animal seated at the gate of a pagoda.

At last we arrive at the foot of Osueva's temple, and, leaving our
djins with our little gigs, we clamber up the gigantic steps,
completely deserted at this hour of the night.

Chrysanthème, who always likes to play the part of a tired little
girl, of a spoilt and pouting child, ascends slowly between Yves and
myself, clinging to our arms.

Jonquille, on the contrary, skips up like a bird, amusing herself by
counting the endless steps:

"Hitôts'! F'tâts'! Mits'! Yôts'!" ("One! two! three! four!") she
exclaims, springing up by a series of little light bounds.

"Itsôôts! Moûts'! Nanâts! Yâts! Kokonôts!" ("Five! six! seven! eight!
nine!")

She lays a great stress on the accentuations, as though to make the
numbers sound even more droll.

A little silver aigrette glitters in her beautiful black chignon; her
delicate and graceful figure seems strangely fantastic, and the
darkness that envelops us conceals the fact that her face is almost
ugly, and almost without eyes.

This evening Chrysanthème and Jonquille really look like little
fairies; at certain moments the most insignificant Japanese have this
appearance, by dint of whimsical elegance and ingenious arrangement.

The granite stairs, immense, deserted, uniformly gray under the
nocturnal sky, seem to vanish into the empty space above us, and when
we turn round, to disappear in the depths beneath, to fall with the
dizzy rapidity of a dream into the abyss below. On the sloping steps
the black shadows of the gateways through which we must pass stretch
out inordinately; and the shadows, which seem to be broken at each
projecting step, bear on all their extent the regular creases of a
fan. The porticos stand up separately, rising one above the other;
their wonderful shapes are at once remarkably simple and studiously
affected; their outlines stand out sharp and distinct, having
nevertheless the vague appearance of all very large objects in the
pale moonlight. The curved architraves rise up at each extremity like
two menacing horns, pointing upwards towards the far-off blue canopy
of sky bespangled with stars, as thought they would communicate to the
gods the knowledge they have acquired in the depths of their
foundations from the earth, full of sepulchers and death, which
surrounds them.

We are, indeed, a very small group, lost now in the immensity of the
colossal acclivity as we move onwards, lighted partly by the wan moon
on high, partly by the red lanterns we hold in our hands, ever
floating at the end of their long sticks.

A deep silence reigns in the precincts of the temple, the sound of the
insects even is hushed as we ascend higher. A sort of reverence, a
kind of religious fear steals over us, and, at the same moment, a
delicious coolness suddenly pervades the air, and passes over us.

On entering the courtyard above, we feel a little daunted. Here we
find the horse in jade, and the china turrets. The enclosing walls
make it the more gloomy, and our arrival seems to disturb I know not
what mysterious council held between the spirits of the air and the
visible symbols that are there, chimeras and monsters lit up by the
blue rays of the moon.

We turn to the left, and go through the terraced gardens, to reach the
tea-house "of the Toads," which this evening is our goal; we find it
shut up--expected as much--closed and dark, at this hour! We drum all
together on the door; in the most coaxing tones we call by name the
waiting-maids we know so well: Mdlle. Transparente, Mdlle. Etoile,
Mdlle. Roséematinale, and Mdlle. Marguerite-reine. Not an answer.
Goodbye perfumed sherbets and frosted beans!

In front of the little archery-house, our mousmés suddenly start on
one side, terrified, and declaring that there is a dead body on the
ground. Yes, indeed, someone is lying there. We cautiously examine the
place by the light of our red balloons, carefully held out at arm's
length for fear of this dead man; it is only the marksman, he who on
the 14th of July chose such magnificent arrows for Chrysanthème; and
he sleeps, good man, with his chignon somewhat dishevelled, a sound
sleep, which it would be cruel to disturb.

Let us go to the end of the terrace, contemplate the roadstead at our
feet, and then return home. To-night the harbor looks only like a dark
and sinister rent, which the moonbeams cannot fathom,--a yawning
crevasse opening into the very bowels of the earth, at the bottom of
which lie faint and small glimmers, an assembly of glow-worms in a
ditch--the lights of the different vessels lying at anchor.




XLVII.


It is the middle of the night, somewhere about two in the morning. Our
night-lamps are burning still, a little dimly, in front of our
peaceful idols. Chrysanthème wakes me suddenly, and I turn to look at
her: she has raised herself on one arm, and her face expresses the
most intense terror; she makes me a sign, without daring to speak,
that someone is near, or something, creeping up to us. What ill-timed
visit is this? A feeling of fear gains possession of me also. I have a
rapid impression of some immense unknown danger, in this isolated
spot, in this strange country of which I do not even yet comprehend
the inhabitants and the mysteries. It must be something very
frightful, to hold her there, rooted to the spot, half dead with
fright, she who _does_ comprehend all these things.

It would seem to be outside: it is coming from the garden; with
trembling hand she indicates to me that it will come through the
verandah, over Madame Prune's roof. Certainly, I can hear faint
noises, and they do approach nearer.

I suggest to her:

"_Neko-San?_" ("It is Messrs. the cats?")

"No!" she replies, still terrified and in an alarming tone.

"_Bakémono-Sama?_" ("Is it my lords the ghosts?") I have already the
Japanese habit of expressing myself with excessive politeness.

'No!!" _"Dorobo!!"_("Thieves!!") Thieves! Ah this is better; I much
prefer this to a visit such as I have just been, dreading in the
sudden awakening from sleep: from ghosts or spirits of the dead;
thieves, that is to say, worthy fellows very much alive, and having
undoubtedly, in as much as they are Japanese thieves, faces of the
most meritorious oddity. I am not in the least frightened, now that I
know precisely what to expect, and we will immediately set to work to
ascertain the truth, for something is decidedly moving on Madame
Prune's roof; some one is walking upon it.

I open one of our wooden panels and look out.

I can see only a vast expanse, calm, peaceful, and exquisite under the
full brilliancy of the moonlight; sleeping Japan lulled by the
sonorous song of the grasshoppers is charming indeed to-night, and the
free pure air is delicious to breathe.

Chrysanthème, half hidden behind my shoulder, listens tremblingly,
peering forward to examine the gardens and the roofs with dilated eyes
like a frightened cat. No, nothing! not a thing moves. Here and there
are a few strangely substantial shadows, which at the first glance
were not easy to explain, but which turn out to be real shadows,
thrown by bits of wall, by boughs of trees, and which preserve an
extremely reassuring stillness. Everything seems absolutely tranquil,
and profound silence reigns in the dreamy vagueness which moonlight
sheds over all.

Nothing; nothing to be seen anywhere. It was Messrs, the cats after
all, or perhaps my ladies the owls; sounds increase in volume in the
most amazing manner at night, in this house of ours.

Let us close the panel again carefully, as a measure of prudence, and
then light a lantern and go downstairs to see if there may be any one
hidden in corners, and if the doors are tightly shut: in short, to
reassure Chrysanthème we will go the round of the house.

Behold us then, on tip-toe, searching together every hole and corner
of the house, which, to judge by its foundations, must be very
ancient, notwithstanding the fragile appearance of its panels of white
paper. It contains the blackest of cavities, little vaulted cellars
with worm-eaten beams; cupboards for rice which smell of mould and
decay; mysterious hollows where lies accumulated the dust of
centuries. In the middle of the night, and during a hunt for thieves,
this part of the house, as yet unknown to me, has an ugly look.

Noiselessly we step across the apartment of our landlord and landlady.
Chrysanthème drags me by the hand, and I allow myself to be led.
There they are, sleeping in a row under their blue gauze tent, lighted
by the night-lamps burning before the altars of their ancestors. Ha! I
observe that they are arranged in an order which might give rise to
gossip. First comes Mdlle. Oyouki, very taking in her attitude of
rest. Then Madame Prune, who sleeps with her mouth wide open, showing
her rows of blackened teeth; from her throat arises an intermittent
sound like the grunting of a sow. Oh! poor Madame Prune! how hideous
she is!! Next, M. Sucre, a mere mummy for the time being. And finally,
at his side, last of the row, is their servant, Mdlle. Dédé!!!

The gauze hanging over them throws reflections as of the sea upon
them; one might suppose them victims drowned in an aquarium. And
withal the sacred lamps, the altar crowded with strange Shintoist
symbols, give a mock religious air to this family picture.

_Honi soit qui mal y pense_, but why is not that servant-girl rather
laid by the side of her mistresses? Now, when we on the floor above
offer our hospitality to Yves, we are careful to place ourselves under
our mosquito-net in a more correct style.

One corner, which as a last resort we inspect, inspires me with a
certain amount of apprehension. It is a low, mysterious loft, against
the door of which is stuck, as a thing no longer wanted, a very old
pious image: _Kwanon with the thousand arms, and Kwanon with the
horses' head_, seated among clouds and flames, and horrible both of
them to behold, with their spectral grin.

We open the door, and Chrysanthème starts back uttering a fearful cry.
I should have thought the robbers were there, had I not seen a little
grey creature, rapid and noiseless, rush by her and disappear; a young
rat that had been eating rice on the top of a shelf, and, in its
alarm, had dashed in her face.




XLVIII

_September 14th_.


Yves has dropped his silver whistle in the sea, the whistle so
absolutely indispensable for the maneuvers; and we search the town
through all day long, followed by Chrysanthème and Mdlles. La Neige
and La Lune, her sisters, in the endeavor to procure another.

It is, however, very difficult to find such a thing in Nagasaki; above
all, very difficult to explain in Japanese what is a sailor's whistle
of the traditional shape, curved and with a little ball at the end to
modulate the trills and the various sounds of official orders. For
three hours we are sent from shop to shop; at each one they pretend to
understand perfectly what is wanted and trace on tissue-paper, with a
paint-brush, the addresses of the shops where we shall without fail
meet with what we require,--away we go, full of hope, only to
encounter some fresh mystification, till our breathless djins get
quite bewildered.

They understand admirably that we want a thing that will make a noise,
music in short; thereupon they offer us instruments of every and the
most unexpected shape,--squeakers for Punch-and-Judy voices,
dog-whistles, trumpets. Each time it is something more and more
absurd, so that at last we are overcome with uncontrollable fits of
laughter. Last of all, an aged Japanese optician, who assumes a most
knowing air, a look of sublime wisdom, goes off to forage in his back
shop, and brings to light a steam fog-horn, a relic from some wrecked
steamer.

After dinner, the chief event of the evening is a deluge of rain which
takes us by surprise as we leave the tea-houses, on our return from
our fashionable stroll. It so happened that we were a large party,
having with us several mousmé guests, and from the moment that the
rain began to fall from the skies, as if out of a watering-pot turned
upside down, the band became disorganized. The mousmés run off, with
birdlike cries, and take refuge under door-ways, in the shops, under
the hoods of the djins.

Then, before long,--when the shops shut up in haste, when the emptied
streets are flooded, and almost black, and the paper lanterns, piteous
objects, wet through and extinguished,--I find myself, I know not how
it happens, flattened against a wall, under the projecting eaves,
alone in the company of Mdlle. Fraise, my cousin, who is crying
bitterly because her fine dress is wet through. And in the noise of
the rain, which is still falling and splashing everything; with the
spouts and gutters, which in the darkness plaintively murmur like
running streams, the town appears to me suddenly an abode of the
gloomiest sadness.

The shower is soon over, and the mousmés come out of their holes like
so many mice; they look for each other, call each other, and their
little voices take the singular melancholy, dragging inflections they
assume whenever they have to call from afar.

"Hi! Mdlle. Lu-u-u-u une!!"

"Hi! Madame Jonqui-i-i-i ille!!"

They shout from one to the other their outlandish names, prolonging
them indefinitely in the now silent night, in the reverberations of
the damp air after the great summer rain.

At length they are all collected and united again, these tiny
personages with narrow eyes and no brains, and we return to
Diou-djen-dji all wet through.

For the third time, we have Yves sleeping beside us under our blue
tent.

There is a great row soon after midnight in the apartment beneath us:
our landlord's family returning from a pilgrimage to a far-distant
temple of the Goddess of Grace. (Although Madame Prune is a Shintoist,
she reveres this deity, who, scandal says, watched over her youth.) A
moment after, Mdlle. Oyouki bursts into our room like a rocket,
bringing, on a charming little tray, sweetmeats which have been
blessed and bought at the gates of the temple yonder, on purpose for
us, and which we must positively eat at once, before the virtue is
gone out of them. Scarcely rousing ourselves, we absorb these little
edibles flavored with sugar and pepper, and return a great many sleepy
thanks.

Yves sleeps quietly on this occasion, without dealing any blows to the
floor or the panels either with fists or feet. He has hung his watch
on one of the hands of our gilded idol in order to be more sure of
seeing the hour at any time of the night, by the light of the sacred
lamps. He gets up betimes in the morning, asking: "Well, did I behave
properly?" and dresses in haste, preoccupied about duty and the
roll-call.

Outside, no doubt, it is daylight already: through the tiny holes
which time has pierced in our wooden panels, threads of morning light
penetrate our chamber, and in the atmosphere of our room where night
still lingers, they trace vague white rays. Soon, when the sun shall
have risen, these rays will lengthen and become beautifully golden.
The cocks and the cicalas make themselves heard, and now Madame Prune
will begin her mystic drone.

Nevertheless, out of politeness for Yves-San, Chrysanthème lights a
lantern and escorts him to the foot of the dark staircase. I even
fancy that, on parting, I hear a kiss exchanged. In Japan this is of
no consequence, that I know; it is very usual, and quite admissible;
no matter where one goes, in houses one enters for the first time, one
is quite at liberty to kiss any mousmé who may be present, without any
notice being taken of it. But with regard to Chrysanthème, Yves is in
a delicate position, and he ought to understand it better. I begin to
feel uneasy about the hours they have so often spent together alone;
and I make up my mind, that this very day I will not play the spy
upon them, but speak frankly to Yves, and make a clear breast of it.

All at once from below, _clac! clac!_ two dry hands clapped together;
it is Madame Prune's warning to the Great Spirit. And immediately
after her prayer breaks forth, soars upwards in a shrill nasal
falsetto, like a morning alarm when the hour for waking has come, the
mechanical noise of a spring let go and running down.

_"The richest woman in the world. Cleansed from all my sins, O
Ama-Térace-Omi-Kami, in the river of Kamo."_

And this extraordinary bleating, scarcely human, scatters and changes
my ideas, which were very nearly clear at the moment I awoke.




XLIX.

_September 15th_.


There is a rumor of departure in the air. Since yesterday there has
been vague talk of our being sent to China, to the gulf of Pekin; one
of those rumors which spread, no one knows how, from one end of the
ship to the other, two or three days before the official orders
arrive, and which generally turn out tolerably correct. What will the
last act of my little Japanese comedy be like? the dénouement, the
separation? Will there be any touch of sadness on the part of my
mousmé, or on my own, just a tightening of the heart-strings at the
moment of our final farewell? At this moment I can imagine nothing of
the sort. And then the adieux of Yves and Chrysanthème, what will they
be? This question preoccupies me more than all.

There is nothing very precise as yet, but it is certain that one way
or another, our stay in Japan is coming to an end. It is this perhaps
which disposes me this evening, to throw a more friendly glance on my
surroundings. It is about six o'clock, after a day spent on duty, when
I reach Diou-djen-dji. The evening sun, low in the sky, on the point
of setting, pours into my room, and floods it with rays of red gold,
lighting up the Buddhas and the great sheaves of quaintly arranged
flowers in the antique vases. Here are assembled five or six little
dolls, my neighbors, amusing themselves by dancing to the sound of
Chrysanthème's guitar. And this evening I experience a real charm in
feeling that this dwelling and the woman who leads the dance, are
mine. On the whole I have perhaps been unjust to this country; it
seems to me that my eyes are at last opened to see it in its true
light, that all my senses are undergoing a strange and abrupt
transition; I suddenly have a better perception and appreciation of
all the infinity of dainty trifles amongst which I live; of the
fragile and studied grace of their forms, the oddity of their
drawings, the refined choice of their colors.

I stretch myself upon the white mats; Chrysanthème, always eagerly
attentive, brings me my pillow of serpent's skin; and the smiling
mousmés, with the interrupted rhythm of a while ago still running in
their heads, move round me with measured steps.

Their irreproachable socks with the separate great toes, make no
noise; nothing is heard, as they glide by, but a froufrou of silken
stuffs. I find them all pleasant to look upon; their dollish air has
the gift of pleasing me now, and I fancy I have discovered what it is
that gives it to them: it is not only their round inexpressive faces
with eyebrows far removed from the eyelids, but the excessive
amplitude of their dress. With those huge sleeves, it might be
supposed they have neither back nor shoulders; their delicate figures
are lost in these wide robes, which float around what might be little
marionnettes without bodies at all, and which would slip to the ground
of themselves were they not kept together midway, about where a waist
should be, by the wide silken sashes,--a very different comprehension
of the art of dressing to ours, which endeavors as much as possible to
bring into relief the curves, real or false, of the figure.

And then, how much I admire the flowers arranged by Chrysanthème in
our vases, with her Japanese taste: lotus flowers, great sacred
flowers of a tender, veined rose-color, the milky rose-color seen on
porcelain; they resemble, when in full bloom, great water-lilies, and
when only in bud, might be taken for long pale tulips. Their soft but
rather cloying scent is added to that other indefinable odor of
mousmés, of yellow race, of Japan, which is always and everywhere in
the air. The late flowers of September, at this season very rare and
expensive, grow on longer stems than the summer blooms; Chrysanthème
has left them their immense aquatic leaves of a melancholy
seaweed-green, and mingled with them tall slight rushes. I look at
them, and recall with some irony those great round bunches in the
shape of cauliflowers, which our florists sell in France, wrapt in
their white lace-paper.

Still no letters from Europe, from any one. How things change, become
effaced and forgotten. Here I am accommodating myself to this finical
Japan and dwindling down to its affected mannerism; I feel that my
thoughts run in smaller grooves, my tastes incline to smaller
things,--things which suggest nothing greater than a smile. I am
becoming used to tiny and ingenious furniture, to doll-like desks, to
miniature bowls with which to play at dinner, to the immaculate
monotony of the mats, to the finely finished simplicity of the white
woodwork. I am even losing my Western prejudices; all my preconceived
ideas are this evening evaporating and vanishing; crossing the garden
I have courteously saluted M. Sucre, who was watering his dwarf shrubs
and his deformed flowers; and Madame Prune appears to me a highly
respectable old lady, in whose past there is nothing to criticise.

We shall take no walk to-night; my only wish is to remain stretched
out where I am, listening to the music of my mousmé's _chamécen_.

Till now, I have always used the word _guitar_, to avoid exotic terms,
for the abuse of which I have been so reproached. But neither the word
_guitar_ nor _mandolin_ suffices to designate this slender instrument
with its long neck, the high notes of which are shriller than the
voice of the grasshopper; henceforth, I will write _chamécen_.

I will also call my mousmé _Kikou, Kikou-San_; this name suits her
better than Chrysanthème, which though translating the sense exactly,
does not preserve the strange-sounding euphony of the original.

I therefore say to Kikou, my wife:

"Play, play on for me; I shall remain here all the evening and listen
to you."

Astonished to find me in so amiable a mood, she requires pressing a
little, and with almost a bitter curve of triumph and disdain about
her lips, she seats herself in the attitude of an idol, raises her
long, dark-colored sleeves, and begins. The first hesitating notes are
murmured faintly and mingle with the music of the insects humming
outside, in the quiet air of the warm and golden twilight. First she
plays slowly, a confused medley of fragments which she does not seem
to remember perfectly, of which one waits for the finish and waits in
vain; while the other girls giggle, inattentive, and regretful of
their interrupted dance. She herself is absent, sulky, as though she
were performing a duty only.

Then by degrees, little by little, it becomes more animated, and the
mousmés begin to listen. Now, tremblingly it grows into a feverish
rapidity, and her gaze has no longer the vacant stare of a doll. Then
the music changes again; in it there is the sighing of the wind, the
hideous laughter of ghouls; tears, heartrending plaints, and her
dilated pupils seem to be directed inwardly in settled gaze on some
indescribable _Japanesery_ within her own soul.

I listen, lying there with eyes half shut, looking out between my
drooping eyelids which are gradually lowering, in involuntary
heaviness, upon the enormous red sun dying away over Nagasaki. I have
a somewhat melancholy feeling that my past life and all other places
in the world are receding from my view and fading away. At this moment
of nightfall I feel almost at home in this corner of Japan, amidst the
gardens of this suburb; I have never had such an impression before.




L.

_September 16th_.


Seven o'clock in the evening. We shall not go down into the town
to-day; but, like good Japanese citizens, remain in our loftly suburb.

In undress uniform we shall go, Yves and I, in a neighborly way, as
far as the fencing gallery, which is only two steps off, just above
our villa, and almost abutting on our fresh and scented garden.

The gallery is closed already and a little mousko seated at the door,
explains with many low bows that we come too late, all the amateurs
are gone; we must come again to-morrow.

The evening is so mild and so fine, that we remain out of doors,
following without any definite purpose the pathway which rises ever
higher and higher, and loses itself at length in the solitary regions
of the mountain among the upper peaks.

For an hour at least we wander on,--an unintended walk,--and finally
find ourselves at a great height commanding an endless perspective
lighted by the last gleams of daylight; we are in a desolate and
mournful spot, in the midst of the little Buddhist cemeteries, which
are scattered over the country in every direction.

We meet a few belated laborers, who are returning from the fields with
bundles of tea upon their shoulders. These peasants have a half savage
air, half naked too, or clothed only in long robes of blue cotton; as
they pass, they salute us with humble bows.

No trees in this elevated region. Fields of tea alternate with tombs:
old granite statues which represent Buddha in his lotus, or else old
monumental stones on which gleam remains of inscriptions in golden
letters. Rocks, brushwood, uncultivated spaces, surround us on all
sides.

There are no more passers-by, and the light is failing. We will halt
for a moment, and then it will be time to turn our steps downwards.

But, close to the spot where we stand, a box in white wood provided
with handles, a sort of sedan-chair, rests on the freshly disturbed
earth, with its lotus of silvered paper, and the little incense-sticks
burning yet, by its side; clearly someone has been buried here this
very evening.

I cannot picture this personage to myself; the Japanese are so
grotesque in life, that it is almost impossible to imagine them in the
calm majesty of death. Nevertheless, let us move further on, we might
disturb him; he is too recently dead, his presence unnerves us. We
will go and seat ourselves on one of these other tombs, so unutterably
ancient that there can no longer be anything within it but dust. And
there, seated yet in the dying sunlight, while the valleys and plains
of the earth below are already lost in shadow, we will talk together.

I wish to speak to Yves about Chrysanthème; it is indeed somewhat in
view of this that I have persuaded him to sit down; but how to set
about it without hurting his feelings, and without making myself
ridiculous, I hardly know. However, the pure air playing round me up
here, and the magnificent landscape spread beneath my feet, impart a
certain serenity to my thoughts which makes me feel a contemptuous
pity, both for my suspicions and the cause of them.

We speak, first of all, of the order for departure which may arrive at
any moment, for China or for France. Soon we shall have to leave this
easy and almost amusing life, this Japanese suburb where chance has
installed us, and our little house buried among flowers. Yves perhaps
will regret all this more than I shall, I know that well enough; for
it is the first time that any such interlude has broken the rude
monotony of his hard-worked career. Formerly, when in an inferior
rank, he was scarcely more often on shore, in foreign countries, than
the sea-gulls themselves; whilst I have, from the very beginning, been
spoilt by residence in all sorts of charming spots, infinitely
superior to this, in all sorts of countries, and the remembrance
pleasurably haunts me still.

In order to discover how the land lies, I risk the remark:

"You will perhaps be more sorry to leave this little Chrysanthème than
I am?"

Silence reigns between us.

After which I pursue, and, burning my ships, I add:

"You know, after all, if you have such a fancy for her, I haven't
really married her; one can't really consider her my wife."

In great surprise he looks in my face:

"Not your wife, you say? But, by Jove, though, that's just it; she is
your wife."

There is no need of many words at any time between us two; I know
exactly now, by his tone, by his great good-humored smile, how the
case stands; I understand all that lies in the little phrase: "That's
just it, she is your wife." If she were not, well then he could not
answer for what might happen,--notwithstanding any remorse he might
have in the depths of his heart, since he is no longer a bachelor and
free as air, as in former days. But he considers her my wife, and she
is sacred. I have the fullest faith in his word, and I experience a
positive relief, a real joy, at finding my staunch Yves of bygone
days. How could I have so succumbed to the demeaning influence of my
surroundings as to suspect him even, and invent for myself such a
mean, petty anxiety?

We will never even mention that doll again.

We remain up there very late, talking of other things, gazing the
while at the immense depths below our feet, at the valleys and
mountains as they become one by one indistinct and lost in the
deepening darkness. Placed as we are at an enormous height, in the
wide free atmosphere, we seem already to have quitted this miniature
country, already to be freed from the impression of littleness which
it has given us, and from the little links by which it was beginning
to bind us to itself.

Seen from such heights as these, all the countries of the globe bear a
strong resemblance to each other; they lose the imprint made upon them
by man, and by races; by all the atoms swarming on the surface.

As of old, in the Breton marshes, in the woods of Toulven, or at sea
in the night-watches, we talk of all those things to which thoughts
naturally revert in darkness; of ghosts, of spirits, of eternity, of
the great hereafter, of chaos--and we entirely forget little
Chrysanthème!

When we arrive at Diou-djen-dji in the starry night, it is the music
of her _chamécen_, heard from afar, which recalls to us her existence;
she is studying some vocal duet with Mdlle. Oyouki, her pupil.

I feel myself in very good humor this evening, and, relieved from any
absurd suspicions about my poor Yves, am quite disposed to enjoy
without reserve my last days in Japan, and derive therefrom all the
amusement possible.

Let us then stretch ourselves out on the dazzling white mats, and
listen to the singular duet sung by these two mousmés: a strange
musical medley, slow and mournful, beginning with two or three high
notes, and descending at each couplet, in almost an imperceptible
manner, into actual solemnity. The song keeps its dragging slowness;
but the accompaniment becoming more and more accentuated, is like the
impetuous sound of a far-off hurricane. At the end, when these girlish
voices, generally so soft, give out their hoarse and guttural notes,
Chrysanthème's hands fly wildly and convulsively over the quivering
strings. Both of them lower their heads, pout their under-lips in the
effort of bringing out these astonishingly deep notes. And at these
moments, their little narrow eyes open and seem to reveal an
unexpected something, almost a soul, under these trappings of
marionnettes.

But it is a soul which more than ever appears to me of a different
species to my own; I feel my thoughts to be far removed from theirs,
as from the flitting conceptions of a bird, or the dreams of a monkey;
I feel there is betwixt them and myself a great gulf, mysterious and
awful.

Other sounds of music, wafted to us from the distance outside,
interrupt for a moment that of our mousmés. From the depths below,
down in Nagasaki, arises a sudden noise of gongs and guitars; we rush
to the balcony of the verandah to hear it better.

It is a _matsouri_, a fête, a procession passing through the quarter
which is not so virtuous as our own, so our mousmés tell us, with a
disdainful toss of the head. Nevertheless, from the heights on which
we dwell, seen thus in a bird's-eye view, by the uncertain light of
the stars, this district has a singularly chaste air, and the concert
going on therein, purified in its ascent from the depths of the abyss
to our lofty altitudes, reaches us confusedly, a smothered, enchanted,
enchanting sound.

Then it diminishes, and dies away into silence.

The two little friends return to their seats on the mats, and once
more take up their melancholy duet. An orchestra, discreetly subdued
but innumerable, of crickets and cicalas, accompanies them in an
unceasing tremolo,--the immense far-reaching tremolo, which, gentle
and eternal, never ceases on Japanese land.




LI.

_September 17th_.


During the hour of siesta, the abrupt order arrives to start to-morrow
for China, for Tchefou (a horrid place in the gulf of Pekin). It is
Yves who comes to wake me in my cabin to bring me the news.

"I must positively get leave to go on shore this evening," he says,
while I endeavor to shake myself awake, "if it is only to help you to
dismantle and pack up there."

He gazes through my port-hole, raising his glance towards the green
summits, in the direction of Diou-djen-dji and our echoing old
cottage, hidden from us by a turn of the mountain.

It is very nice of him to wish to help me in my packing; but I think
he also counts upon saying farewell to his little Japanese friends up
there, and I really cannot find fault with that.

He gets through his work, and does in fact get leave without help from
me, to go on shore at five o'clock, after drill and manœuvres.

As for myself, I start off at once, in a hired sampan. In the vast
flood of midday sunshine, to the quivering noise of the cicalas, I
mount up to Diou-djen-dji.

The paths are solitary, the plants drooping in the heat. Here,
however, is Madame Jonquille, taking the air, in the bright sunshine
of the grasshoppers, sheltering her dainty figure and her charming
face under an immense paper parasol, a huge circle, closely ribbed and
fantastically striped.

She recognizes me from afar, and laughing as usual, runs to meet me.

I announce our departure, and a tearful pout suddenly contracts her
childish face. After all, does this news grieve her? Is she going to
shed tears over it? No! it turns to a fit of laughter, a little
nervous perhaps, but unexpected and disconcerting,--dry and clear,
pealing through the silence and warmth of the narrow paths, like a
cascade of little mock pearls.

Ah, there indeed is a marriage tie which will be broken without much
pain! But she fills me with impatience, poor empty-headed linnet, with
her laughter, and I turn my back upon her to continue my journey.

Up above, Chrysanthème sleeps, stretched out on the floor; the house
is wide open, and the soft mountain breeze rustles gently through it.

That same evening we had intended to give a tea-party, and by my
orders flowers had already been placed in every nook and corner of the
house. There were lotus in our vases, beautiful rose-colored lotus,
the last of the season, I verily believe. They must have been ordered
from a special gardener, out yonder near the Great Temple, and they
will cost me dear.

With a few gentle taps of a fan I awake my surprised mousmé; and,
curious to catch her first impressions, I announce my departure. She
starts up, rubs her eyelids with the back of her little hands, looks
at me, and hangs her head: something like an expression of sadness
passes in her eyes.

This little sinking at the heart is for Yves, no doubt.

The news spreads through the house.

Mdlle. Oyouki dashes upstairs, with half a tear in each of her babyish
eyes; kisses me with her full red lips, which always leave a wet ring
on my cheek; then quickly draws from her wide sleeve a square of
tissue-paper, wipes away her stealthy tears, blows her little nose,
rolls the bit of paper in a ball, and throws it into the street on the
parasol of a passer-by.

Then Madame Prune makes her appearance; in an agitated and discomposed
manner she successively adopts every attitude expressive of utter
dismay. What on earth is the matter with the old lady, and why will
she keep getting closer and closer to me, till she is almost in my
way?

It is wonderful all I still have to do this last day, and the endless
drives I have to make to the old curiosity shops, to my tradespeople,
and to the packers.

Nevertheless before my rooms are dismantled, I intend making a sketch
of them, as I did formerly at Stamboul. It really seems to me as if
all I do here is a bitter parody of all I did over there.

This time, however, it is not that I care for this dwelling; it is
only because it is pretty and uncommon, and the sketch will be an
interesting souvenir.

I fetch, therefore, a leaf out of my album, and begin at once, seated
on the floor and leaning on my desk, ornamented with grasshoppers in
relief, while behind me, very, very close to me, the three women
follow the movements of my pencil with an astonished attention.
Japanese art being entirely conventional, they have never before seen
anyone draw from nature, and my style delights them. I may not perhaps
possess the steady and nimble touch of M. Sucre, as he groups his
charming storks, but I am master of a few notions of perspective which
are wanting in him; and I have been taught to draw things as I see
them, without giving them ingeniously distorted and grimacing
attitudes; and the three Japanese are amazed at the air of _reality_
thrown in my sketch.

With little shrieks of admiration, they point out to each other the
different things, as little by little their shape and form are
outlined in black on my paper. Chrysanthème gazes at me with a new
kind of interest: "_Anata itchi-ban_!" she says (literally "Thou
first!" meaning: "You are really quite a swell!") Mdlle. Oyouki is
carried away by her admiration and exclaims in a burst of enthusiasm:

_"Anata bakari!"_ ("Thou alone!" that is to say: "There is no one like
you in the world, all the rest are mere rubbish!")

Madame Prune says nothing, but I can see that she does not think the
less; her languishing attitudes, her hand that at each moment gently
touches mine, confirm the suspicions that her look of dismay a few
moments ago awoke within me: evidently my physical charms speak to her
imagination, which in spite of years has remained full of romance! I
shall leave with the regret of having understood her too late!!

If the ladies are satisfied with my sketch, I am far from being so. I
have put everything in its place most exactly, but as a whole, it has
an ordinary, indifferent, French look which does not suit. The
sentiment is not given, and I almost wonder whether I should not have
done better in falsifying the perspective,--Japanese style--and
exaggerating to the very utmost the already abnormal outlines of what
I see before me. And then the pictured dwelling lacks the fragile look
and its sonority, that reminds one of a dry violin. In the penciled
delineation of the woodwork, the minute delicacy with which it is
wrought is wanting; neither have I been able to render the extreme
antiquity, the perfect cleanliness, nor the vibrating song of the
cicalas that seems to have been stored away within it, in its
parched-up fibers, during some hundreds of summers. It does not either
convey the impression this place gives of being in a far-off suburb,
perched aloft among trees, above the drollest of towns. No, all this
cannot be drawn, cannot be expressed, but remains undemonstrable,
undefinable.

Having sent out our invitations, we shall in spite of everything, give
our tea-party this evening,--a parting tea, therefore, in which we
will display as much pomp as possible. It is, moreover, rather my
custom to wind up my exotic existences with a fête; in other countries
I have done the same.

Besides our usual set, we shall have my mother-in-law, my relatives,
and all the mousmés of the neighborhood. But, by an extra Japanese
refinement, we shall not admit a single European friend,--not even the
_amazingly tall_ one. Yves alone shall be admitted, and even he shall
be hidden away in a corner behind some flowers and works of art.

In the last glimmer of twilight, by the first twinkling star, the
ladies, with many charming curtseys, make their appearance. Our house
is soon full of the little crouching women, with their tiny slit eyes
vaguely smiling; their beautifully dressed hair shining like polished
ebony; their fragile bodies lost in the many folds or the exaggerated
wide garments, that gape as if ready to drop from their little
tapering backs and reveal the exquisite napes of their little necks.

Chrysanthème, with somewhat a melancholy air; my mother-in-law
Renoncule, with many affected graces, busy themselves in the midst of
the different groups, where ere long the miniature pipes are lighted.
Soon there arises a murmuring sound of discreet laughter, expressing
nothing, but having a pretty exotic ring about it, and then begins a
harmony of _pan! pan! pan!_ sharp, rapid taps against the edges of the
finely lacquered smoking-boxes. Pickled and spiced fruits are handed
round on trays of quaint and varied shapes. Then transparent china
tea-cups, no larger than half an egg-shell, make their appearance, and
the ladies are offered a few drops of sugarless tea, poured out of toy
kettles, or a sip of _saki_--(a spirit made from rice which it is the
custom to serve hot, in elegantly shaped vases, long-necked like a
heron's throat).

Several mousmés execute, one after the other, improvizations on the
_chamécen_. Others sing in sharp high voices hopping about
continually, like cicalas in delirium.

Madame Prune, no longer able to make a mystery of the long-pent up
feelings that agitate her, pays me the most marked and tender
attentions, and begs my acceptance of a quantity of little souvenirs:
an image, a little vase, a little porcelain goddess of the Moon in
Satsuma ware, a marvelously grotesque ivory figure;--I tremblingly
follow her into the dark corners whither she calls me to give me these
presents in a _tête-à-tête_.

At about nine o'clock, with a silken rustling, arrive the three
guéchas in vogue in Nagasaki: Mdlles. Pureté, Orange, and Printemps,
whom I have hired at four dollars a head,--an enormous price in this
country.

These three guéchas are indeed the very same little creatures I heard
singing on the rainy day of my arrival, through the thin paneling of
the _Garden of Flowers_. But as I have now become thoroughly
_Japanized_, to-day they appear to me more diminutive, less
outlandish, and in no way mysterious. I treat them rather as dancers
that I have hired, and the idea that I had ever thought of marrying
one of them now makes me shrug my shoulders,--as it formerly did M.
Kangourou.

The excessive heat caused by the respiration of the mousmés and the
burning lamps, brings out the perfume of the lotus, which fills the
heavy-laden atmosphere; and the scent of the camelia-oil the ladies
use in profusion to make their hair glisten, is also strong in the
room.

Mdlle. Orange, the youngest guécha, tiny and dainty, her lips outlined
with gilt paint, executes some delightful steps, donning the most
extraordinary wigs and masks in wood or cardboard. She has masks
imitating old noble ladies which are valuable works of art, signed by
well-known artists. She has also magnificent long robes, fashioned in
the old style, and trains trimmed at the bottom with thick pads, in
order to give to the movements of the costume something rigid and
unnatural which, however, is becoming.

Now the soft balmy breezes blow through the room, from one verandah to
the other, making the flames of the lamps flicker. They scatter the
lotus flowers faded by the artificial heat, which, falling in pieces
from every vase, sprinkle the guests with their pollen and large pink
petals, looking like bits of broken opal-colored glass.

The sensational piece, reserved for the end, is a trio on the
_chamécen_, long and monotonous, that the guéchas perform as a rapid
_pizzicato_ on the highest strings, very sharply struck. It sounds
like the very quintescence, the paraphrase, the exasperation if I may
so call it, of the eternal buzz of insects, which issues from the
trees, old roofs, old walls, from everything in fact, and which is the
ground-work of all Japanese sounds.

Half-past ten! The program has been carried out, and the reception is
over. A last general _pan! pan! pan!_ the little pipes are stowed away
into their chased sheaths, tied up in the sashes, and the mousmés rise
to depart.

They light, at the end of short sticks, a quantity of red, gray or
blue lanterns, and after a series of endless bows and curtseys, the
guests disperse themselves in the darkness of the lanes and trees.

We also go down to the town,--Yves, Chrysanthème, Oyouki, and
myself,--in order to conduct my mother-in-law, sisters-in-law, and
youthful aunt, Madame Nénufar, to their house.

We want to take one last stroll together in our old familiar pleasure
haunts, drink one more iced sherbet at the house of the _Indescribable
Butterflies_, buy one more lantern at Madame Très-Propre's, and eat
some parting waffles at Madame L'Heure's!

I try to be affected, moved, by this leave-taking, but without
success. In this Japan, as with the little men and women who inhabit
it, there is something decidedly wanting; pleasant enough as a mere
pastime, it begets no feeling of attachment.

On our return, when I am once more with Yves and the two mousmés
climbing up the road to Diou-djen-dji, which I shall probably never
see again, a vague feeling of melancholy pervades my last stroll.

It is, however, but the melancholy inseparable from all things that
are about to end without possibility of return.

Moreover, this calm and splendid summer is also drawing to a close for
us,--since to-morrow we shall go forth to meet the autumn, in Northern
China. I am beginning, alas! to count the youthful summers I may still
hope for; I feel more gloomy each time another fades away, and flies
to rejoin the others already disappeared in the dark and bottomless
abyss, where all past things lie buried.

At midnight we return home, and my removal begins; while on board the
_amazingly tall friend_ kindly takes my watch.

It is a nocturnal, rapid, stealthy removal,--_"dorobo_ (thieves)
fashion" remarks Yves, who in frequenting the mousmés has picked up a
smattering of the Niponese language.

Messrs, the packers have, at my request, sent in the evening several
charming little boxes, with compartments and false bottoms, and
several paper bags (in the untearable Japanese paper), which close of
themselves and are fastened by strings, also in paper, arranged
beforehand in the most ingenious manner,--quite the cleverest and most
handy thing of its kind; for little useful trifles these people are
unrivaled.

It is a real treat to pack them, and everybody lends a helping
hand,--Yves, Chrysanthème, Madame Prune, her daughter, and M. Sucre.
By the glimmer of the reception-lamps, which are still burning, every
one wraps, rolls, and ties up expeditiously, for it is already late.

Although Oyouki has a heavy heart, she cannot prevent herself from
indulging in a few bursts of childish laughter while she works.

Madame Prune, bathed in tears, no longer restrains her feelings; poor
lady, I really very much regret....

Chrysanthème is absent-minded and silent.

But what a fearful amount of luggage! Eighteen cases or parcels,
containing Buddhas, chimeras, and vases, without mentioning the last
lotus that I carry away tied up in a pink cluster.

All this is piled up in the djins' carts, hired at sunset, which are
waiting at the door, while their runners lie asleep on the grass.

A starlit and exquisite night. We start off with lighted lanterns,
followed by the three sorrowful ladies who accompany us, and by abrupt
slopes, dangerous in the darkness, we descend towards the sea.

The djins, stiffening their muscular legs, hold back with all their
might the heavily loaded little cars which would run down by
themselves if let alone, and that so rapidly, that they would rush
into empty space with my most valuable chattels. Chrysanthème walks by
my side, and expresses, in a soft and winning manner, her regret that
the _wonderfully tall friend_ did not offer to replace me for the
whole of my night-watch, as that would have allowed me to spend this
last night, even till morning, under our roof.

"Listen," she says, "come back to-morrow in the daytime, before
getting under way, to bid me good-by; I shall only return to my mother
in the evening; you will find me still up there."

And I promise.

They stop at a certain turn, from whence we have a bird's-eye view of
the whole roadstead; the black stagnant waters reflect innumerable
distant fires, and the ships--tiny immovable little objects, which
seen from our point of view take the shape of fish, seem also to
slumber,--little objects which serve to bear us _elsewhere_, to go far
away, and to forget.

The three ladies are going to turn back home, for the night is
already far advanced, and lower down, the cosmopolitan quarters near
the quays are not safe at this unusual hour.

The moment has therefore come for Yves--who will not land again--to
make his last tragic farewells to his friends the little mousmés.

Now I am very curious to see the parting between Yves and
Chrysanthème; I listen with all my ears, I look with all my eyes, it
takes place in the simplest and quietest fashion: none of that
heartbreaking which will be inevitable between Madame Prune and
myself; I even notice in my mousmé an indifference, an unconcern which
puzzles me; I positively am at a loss to understand what it all means.

And I muse to myself as I continue to descend towards the sea. "Her
appearance of sadness was not, therefore, on Yves' account. On whose,
then?" and the phrase runs through my head:

"Come back to-morrow before setting sail, to bid me good-by; I shall
only return to my mother in the evening; you will find me still up
there."

Japan is indeed most delightful this evening, so fresh and so sweet;
and little Chrysanthème was very charming just now, as she silently
walked beside me through the darkness of the lane.

It is about two o'clock when we reach the _Triomphante_ in a hired
sampan, where I have heaped up all my cases till there is danger of
sinking. The _very tall friend_ gives over to me the watch that I must
keep till four o'clock; and the sailors on duty, but half awake, make
a chain in the darkness, to haul on board all my fragile luggage.




LII.

_September 18th_.


I had planned to sleep late this morning, in order to make up for my
lost sleep of last night.

But behold, at eight o'clock, three persons of the most singular
appearance, led by M. Kangourou, present themselves with endless bows
at the door of my cabin. They are dressed in long robes bedizened with
dark patterns; they have the flowing locks, high foreheads and pallid
countenances of persons too exclusively devoted to the fine arts; and,
perched on the top of their chignons, they wear sailor hats of English
shape stuck jauntily on one side. Under their arms, they carry
portfolios filled with sketches; in their hands, boxes of
water-colors, pencils, and, tied together like fasces, a bundle of
fine stylets the sharp points of which glitter ostensibly.

At the first glance, even in the bewilderment of waking, I gather from
their appearance what their errand is, and guessing with what visitors
I have to deal, I say:--"Come in, Messieurs the tattooers!"

These are the specialists most in renown in Nagasaki; I had engaged
them two days ago, not knowing that we were about to leave, and since
they are come I will not turn them away.

My friendly and intimate relations with primitive man, in Oceania and
elsewhere, have imbued me with a deplorable taste for tattoo work; and
I had wished to carry away on me, as a curiosity, an ornament, a
specimen of the work of the Japanese tattooers, who have a delicacy of
finish which is unequaled.

From their albums spread out upon my table I make my choice. There are
some remarkably odd designs amongst them, appropriate to the different
parts of the human body: emblems for the arms and legs, sprays of
roses for the shoulders, great grinning faces for the middle of the
back. There are even, to suit the taste of their clients who belong to
foreign navies, trophies of arms, American and French flags entwined,
a "God Save the Queen" amid encircling stars, and figures of women
taken from Grévin's sketches in the _Journal Amusant_.

My choice rests upon a singular blue and pink dragon a couple of
inches long, which will have a fine effect upon my chest on the side
opposite the heart.

Then follows an hour and a half of irritation and positive pain.
Stretched out on my bunk and delivered over to the tender mercies of
these personages, I stiffen myself and submit to the million
imperceptible pricks they inflict. When by chance a little blood
flows, confusing the outline by a stream of red, one of the artists
hastens to staunch it with his lips, and I make no objections, knowing
that this is the Japanese manner, the method used by their doctors for
the wounds of both man and beast.

A piece of work as minute and fine as that of an engraver upon stone
is slowly executed on my person; and their lean hands harrow and worry
me with automatic precision.

At length it is finished, and the tattooers, falling back with an air
of satisfaction to contemplate their work, declare it will be lovely.

I dress myself quickly to go on shore, and take advantage of my last
hours in Japan.

The heat is fearful to-day: the powerful September sun falls with a
certain melancholy upon the yellowing leaves; it is a day of clear
burning heat after an almost chilly morning.

Like yesterday, it is during the drowsy noon that I ascend to my lofty
suburb, by deserted pathways filled only with light and silence.

I noiselessly open the door of my dwelling, and enter cautiously on
tiptoe, for fear of Madame Prune.

At the foot of the staircase, upon the white mats, by the side of the
little clogs and little sandals which are always lying about the
vestibule, there is a great array of luggage ready for departure,
which I recognize at a glance,--pretty dark-colored dresses, familiar
to my sight, carefully folded and wrapped in blue towels tied at the
four corners. I even fancy I feel a little sad when I catch sight of a
corner of the famous box of letters and souvenirs peeping out of one
of these bundles, in which ray portrait by Uyeno now reposes among
divers photographs of mousmés. A sort of long-necked mandolin, also
ready for departure, lies on the top of the pile in its case of
figured silk. It resembles the flitting of some gypsy, or rather it
reminds me of an engraving in a book of fables I owned in my
childhood: the whole thing is exactly like the slender wardrobe and
the long guitar which the Cicala who had sung all the summer, carried
upon her back when she knocked at the door of her neighbor the ant.

Poor little gypsy!

I mount the stairs on tiptoe, and stop at the sound of singing that I
hear up in my room.

It is undoubtedly Chrysanthème's voice and the song is a cheerful one!
This chills me and changes the current of my thoughts. I am almost
sorry I have taken the trouble to come.

Mingled with the song is a noise I cannot understand: _dzinn! dzinn!_
a clear metallic ring as of coins being flung vigorously on the floor.
I am well aware that this vibrating house exaggerates every sound
during the silence of night; but all the same, I am puzzled to know
what my mousmé can be doing. _Dzinn! dzinn!_ is she amusing herself
with quoits, or the _jeu du crapaud_, or pitch and toss?

Nothing of the kind; I fancy I have guessed, and I continue my upward
progress still more gently, on all fours, with the precautions of a
Red Indian, to give myself for the last time the pleasure of
surprising her.

She has not heard me come in. In our great white room, emptied and
swept out, where the clear sunshine pours in, and the soft wind, and
the yellowed leaves of the garden; she is sitting all alone, her back
turned to the door: she is dressed for walking, ready to go to her
mother's, her rose-colored parasol beside her.

On the floor are spread out all the fine silver dollars which,
according to our agreement, I had given her the evening before. With
the competent dexterity of an old money-changer she fingers them,
turns them over, throws them on the floor, and armed with a little
mallet _ad hoc,_ rings them vigorously against her ear, singing the
while I know not what little pensive bird-like song which I daresay
she improvises as she goes along.

Well, after all, it is even more completely Japanese than I could
possibly have imagined it--this last scene of my married life! I feel
inclined to laugh. How simple I have been, to allow myself to be taken
in by the few clever words she whispered yesterday, as she walked
beside me, by a tolerably pretty little phrase embellished as it was
by the silence of two o'clock in the morning, and all the wonderful
enchantments of night.

Ah! not more for Yves than for me, not more for me than for Yves, has
any feeling passed through that little brain, that little heart.

When I have looked at her long enough, I call:--

"Hi! Chrysanthème!"

She turns confused, and reddening even to her ears at having been
caught at this work.

She is quite wrong, however, to be so much troubled, for I am, on the
contrary, delighted. The fear that I might be leaving her in some
sadness had almost given me a pang, and I infinitely prefer that this
marriage should end as it had begun, in a joke.

"That is a good idea of yours," I say; "a precaution which should
always be taken in this country of yours, where so many evil-minded
people are clever in forging money. Make haste and get through it
before I start, and if any false pieces have found their way into the
number, I will willingly replace them."

However, she refuses to continue before me, and I expected as much; to
do so would have been contrary to all her notions of politeness,
hereditary and acquired, all her conventionality, all her
_Japanesery_. With a disdainful little foot, clothed as usual in
exquisite socks with a special hood for the great toe, she pushes away
the piles of white dollars and scatters them on the mats.

"We have hired a large covered sampan," she says to change the
conversation, "and we are all going together,--Campanule, Jonquille,
Touki, all your mousmés--to watch your vessel set sail. Pray sit down
and stay a few minutes."

"No, I really cannot stay. I have several things to do in the town,
d'you see, and the order was given for every one to be on board by
three o'clock in time for muster before starting. Moreover, I would
rather escape, as you can imagine, while Madame Prune is still
enjoying her siesta; I should be afraid of being drawn into some
corner, or of provoking some heartrending parting scene."

Chrysanthème bows her head and says no more, but seeing that I am
really going, rises to escort me.

Without speaking, without the slightest noise, she follows me as we
descend the staircase and cross the garden full of sunshine, where the
dwarf shrubs and the deformed flowers seem, like the rest of the
household, plunged in warm somnolence.

At the outer gate I stop for the last adieu: the little sad pout has
reappeared, more accentuated than ever on Chrysanthème's face; it is
the right thing, it is correct, and I should feel offended now were it
absent.

Well, little mousmé, let us part good friends; one last kiss even, if
you like. I took you to amuse me; you have not perhaps succeeded very
well, but after all you have done what you could: given me your little
face, your little curtseys, your little music; in short, you have
been pleasant enough in your Japanese way. And who knows, perchance I
may yet think of you sometimes when I recall this glorious summer,
these pretty quaint gardens, and the ceaseless concert of the cicales.

She prostrates herself on the threshold of the door, her forehead
against the ground, and remains in this attitude of superlatively
polite salute as long as I am in sight, while I go down the pathway by
which I am to disappear for ever.

As the distance between us increases, I turn once or twice to look at
her again; but it is a mere civility, and meant to return as it
deserves her grand final salutation.




LIII.


On entering the town, at the turn of the principal street, I have the
good luck to meet No. 415, my poor relation. I was just at that moment
in want of a speedy djin, and I at once get into his vehicle; besides,
it will be an alleviation to my feelings, in this hour of departure,
to take my last drive in company with a member of my family.

Unaccustomed as I was to be out of doors during the hours of siesta,
I had never yet seen the streets of the town thus overwhelmed by the
sunshine, thus deserted in the silence and solitary brilliancy
peculiar to all hot countries.

In front of all the shops hang white shades, adorned here and there
with slight designs in black, in the quaintness of which lurks I know
not what,--something mysterious: dragons, emblems, symbolical figures
The sky is too glaring; the light crude, implacable; never has this
old town of Nagasaki appeared to me so old, so worm-eaten, so bald,
notwithstanding all its veneer of new papers and gaudy paintings.
These little wooden houses, of such marvelous cleanly whiteness
inside, are black outside, time-worn, disjointed and _grimacing_. When
one looks closely, this grimace is to be found everywhere: in the
hideous masks laughing in the shop fronts of the innumerable
curio-shops; in the grotesque figures, the playthings, the idols,
cruel, suspicious mad;--it is even found in the buildings: in the
friezes of the religious porticos, in the roofs of the thousand
pagodas; of which the angles and gable-ends writhe and twist like the
yet dangerous remains of ancient and malignant beasts.

And the disturbing intensity of expression reigning over inanimate
nature, contrasts with the almost absolute blank of the human
countenance, with the smiling foolishness of the simple little folk
who meet one's gaze, as they patiently carry on their minute trades in
the gloom of their tiny open-fronted houses. Workmen squatted on their
heels, carving with their imperceptible tools, the droll or odiously
obscene ivory ornaments, marvelous cabinet curiosities which have made
Japan so famous with the European amateurs who have never seen it.
Unconscious artists tracing with steady hand on a background of
lacquer or of porcelain traditional designs learnt by heart, or
transmitted to their brains by a process of heredity through thousands
of years; automatic painters, whose storks are similar to those of M.
Sucre, with the inevitable little rocks, or little butterflies
eternally the same. The least of these illuminators, with his
insignificant eyeless face, possesses at his fingers' ends the maximum
of dexterity in this art of decoration, light and wittily incongruous,
which threatens to invade us in France, in this epoch of imitative
decadence, and which has become the great resource of our
manufacturers of cheap "_objects of art_."

Is it because I am about to leave this country, because I have no
longer any link to bind me to it, any resting-place on its soil, and
that my spirit is already on the wing? I know not, but it seems to me
I have never as clearly seen and comprehended it as to-day. And more
even than ever, do I find it little, aged, with worn-out blood and
worn-out sap; I feel more fully its antediluvian antiquity, its
centuries of mummification, which will soon degenerate into hopeless
and grotesque buffoonery, as it comes into contact with Western
novelties.

It is getting late; little by little, the siestas are everywhere
coming to an end; the queer little streets brighten up and begin to
swarm in the sunshine with many-colored parasols. Now begins the
procession of uglinesses of the most impossible description,--a
procession of long-robed, grotesque figures capped with pot-hats or
sailors' head-gear. Business transactions begin again, and the
struggle for existence, close and bitter here as in one of our own
artisan quarters, but meaner and smaller.

At the moment of my departure, I can only find within myself a smile
of careless mockery for the swarming crowd of this Liliputian
curtseying people,--laborious, industrious, greedy of gain, tainted
with a constitutional affectation, hereditary insignificance, and
incurable monkeyishness.

Poor cousin 415, how right I was to have held him in good esteem; he
is by far the best and most disinterested of my Japanese family. When
all my commissions are finished, he puts up his little vehicle under a
tree, and much touched by my departure, insists upon escorting me on
board the _Triomphante_, to watch over my final purchases in the
sampan which conveys me to the ship, and to see them himself safely
into my cabin.

His, indeed, is the only hand I clasp with a really friendly feeling,
without a suppressed smile, on quitting this Japan.

No doubt, in this country as in many others, there is more honest
friendship and less ugliness among the simple beings devoted to purely
physical work.

At five o'clock in the afternoon we set sail.

Along the line of the shore are two or three sampans; in them the
mousmés, shut up in the narrow cabins, peep at us through the tiny
windows, half hiding their faces on account of the sailors; these are
our wives, who have wished, out of politeness, to look upon us once
more.

There are other sampans as well, in which other Japanese women are
also watching our departure. These stand upright, under great parasols
decorated with big black letters and daubed over with clouds of varied
and startling colors.




LIV.


We move slowly out of the great green bay. The groups of women become
lost in the distance. The country of round and thousand-ribbed
umbrellas fades gradually from our sight.

Now the great sea opens before us, immense, colorless, solitary; a
solemn repose after so much that was too ingenious and too small.

The wooded mountains, the charming capes disappear. And Japan remains
faithful to itself in its last picturesque rocks, its quaint islands
on which the trees tastefully arrange themselves in groups--studied
perhaps, but charmingly pretty.




LV.


In my cabin, one evening, in the midst of the Yellow Sea, my eyes
chance to fall upon the lotus brought from Diou-djen-dji;--they had
lasted for two or three days; but now they have faded, and pitifully
strew my carpet with their pale pink petals.

I, who have carefully preserved so many faded flowers, fallen, alas!
into dust, stolen here and there, at moments of parting in different
parts of the world; I who have kept so many, that the collection is
now almost a herbarium, ridiculous and incoherent--I try hard, but
without success, to get up a sentiment for these lotus--and yet they
are the last living souvenirs of my summer at Nagasaki.

I pick them up, however, with a certain amount of consideration, and I
open my port-hole.

From the gray misty sky a livid light falls upon the waters; a wan and
gloomy kind of twilight creeps down, yellowish upon this Yellow Sea.
We feel that we are moving northwards, that autumn is approaching.

I throw the poor lotus into the boundless waste of waters, making them
my best excuses for giving to them, natives of Japan, a grave so
solemn and so vast.




LVI.


O Ama-Térace-Omi-Kami, wash me clean from this little marriage of
mine, in the waters of the river of Kamo.




THE END




MODERN LIBRARY OF THE WORLD'S BEST BOOKS COMPLETE LIST OF TITLES IN

THE MODERN LIBRARY

_For convenience in ordering please use number at right of title_

AUTHOR                TITLE AND NUMBER

AIKEN, CONRAD         A Comprehensive Anthology of American Verse 101
AIKEN, CONRAD         Modern American Poetry 127
ANDERSON, SHERWOOD    Poor White 115
ANDERSON, SHERWOOD    Winesburg, Ohio 104
ANDREYEV, LEONID      The Seven That Were Hanged, and the Red Laugh 45
APULEIUS, LUCIUS      The Golden Ass 88

BALZAC                Short Stories 40
BAUDELAIRE            Prose and Poetry 70
BEARDSLEY, AUBREY     64 Reproductions 42
BEEBE, WILLIAM        Jungle Peace 30
BEERBOHM, MAX         Zuleika Dobson 116
BIERCE, AMBROSE       In the Midst of Life 133
BLAKE, WILLIAM        Poems 91
BRONTE, EMILY         Wuthering Heights 106
BROWN, GEO. DOUGLAS   The House with the Green Shutters 129
BUTLER, SAMUEL        Erewhon 136
BUTLER, SAMUEL        The Way of All Flesh 13

CABELL, JAMES BRANCH  Beyond Life 25
CABELL, JAMES BRANCH  The Cream of the Jest 126
CARPENTER, EDWARD     Love's Coming of Age 51
CARROLL, LEWIS        Alice in Wonderland, etc. 79
CASANOVA, JACQUES     Memoirs of Casanova 165
CELLINI, BENVENUTO    Autobiography of Benvenuto Cellini 3
CERVANTES             Don Quixote 174
CHAUCER               The Canterbury Tales 161
CHESTERTON, G. K.     Man Who Was Thursday 35
CRANE, STEPHEN        Men, Women and Boats 102

D'ANNUNZIO, GABRIELE  Flame of Life 65
D'ANNUNZIO, GABRIELE  The Child of Pleasure 98
D'ANNUNZIO, GABRIELE  The Triumph of Death 112
DAUDET, ALPHONSE      Sappho 85
DEFOE, DANIEL         Moll Flanders 122
DEWEY, JOHN           Human Nature and Conduct 173
DOSTOYEVSKY, FYODOR   The Brothers Karamazov 151
DOSTOYEVSKY, FYODOR   Poor People 10
DOUGLAS, NORMAN       Old Calabria 141
DOUGLAS, NORMAN       South Wind 5
DOWSON, ERNEST        Poems and Prose

AUTHOR                TITLE AND NUMBER

DUMAS, ALEXANDRE      Camille 69
DUMAS, ALEXANDRE      The Three Musketeers 143
DUNSANY, LORD         A Dreamer's Tales 34

ELLIS, HAVELOCK       The Dance of Life 160
ELLIS, HAVELOCK       The New Spirit 95

FLAUBERT, GUSTAVE     Madame Bovary 28
FLAUBERT, GUSTAVE     Salammbo 118
FLAUBERT, GUSTAVE     Temptation of St. Anthony 92
FRANCE, ANATOLE       Crime of Sylvestre Bonnard 22
FRANCE, ANATOLE       The Queen Pedauque 110
FRANCE, ANATOLE       The Red Lily 7
FRANCE, ANATOLE       The Revolt of the Angels 11
FRANCE, ANATOLE       Thais 67

GAUTIER, THEOPHILE    Mlle. De Maupin 53
GEORGE, W. L.         A Bed of Roses 75
GILBERT, W. S.        The Mikado, Iolanthe, etc. 26
GILBERT, W. S.        Pinafore and Other Plays 113
GISSING, GEORGE       New Grub Street 125
GISSING, GEORGE       Private Papers of Henry Ryecroft 46
GONCOURT, E. & J. DE  Renee Mauperin 76
GORKY, MAXIM          Creatures That Once Were Men and Other Stories 48
GOURMONT, REMY DE     A Night in the Luxembourg 120
GOURMONT, REMY DE     A Virgin Heart 131

HARDY, THOMAS         Jude the Obscure 135
HARDY, THOMAS         The Mayor of Casterbridge 17
HARDY, THOMAS         The Return of the Native 121
HAUPTMANN, GERHART    The Heretic of Soana 149
HAWTHORNE, NATHANIEL  The Scarlet Letter 93
HEARN, LAFCADIO       Some Chinese Ghosts 130
HECHT, BEN            Erik Dorn 29
HEMINGWAY, ERNEST     The Sun Also Rises 170
HOMER                 The Iliad 166
HOMER                 The Odyssey 167
HUDSON, W. H.         Green Mansions 89
HUDSON, W. H.         The Purple Land 24
HUNEKER, JAMES O.     Painted Veils 43
HUXLEY, ALDOUS        A Virgin Heart 131

IBSEN, HENRIK         A Doll's House, Ghosts, etc. 6
IBSEN, HENRIK         Hedda Gabler, Pillars of Society,
                        The Master Builder 36
IBSEN, HENRIK         The Wild Duck, Rosmersholm, The League of Youth 54

JAMES, HENRY          Daisy Miller, etc. 63
JAMES, HENRY          The Turn of the Screw 169
JAMES, WILLIAM        The Philosophy of William James 114
JOYCE, JAMES          Dubliners 124
JOYCE, JAMES          A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man 145

KIPLING, RUDYARD      Soldiers Three 71
KOMROFF, MANUEL       Oriental Romances 55

AUTHOR                TITLE AND NUMBER

LAWRENCE, D. H.       Sons and Lovers 109
LEWISOHN, LUDWIG      Upstream 123
LOTI, PIERRE          Mme. Chrysantheme 94

MACY, JOHN            The Spirit of American Literature 56
MAUPASSANT, GUY DE    Love and Other Stories 72
MAUPASSANT, GUY DE    Mademoiselle Fifi, and Twelve Other Stories 8
MAUPASSANT, GUY DE    Une Vie 57
MENKEN, H. L.         Selected Prejudices 107
MELVILLE, HERMAN      Moby Dick 119
MEREDITH, GEORGE      Diana of the Crossways 14
MEREDITH, GEORGE      The Ordeal of Richard Feverel 134
MEREJKOWSKI, DMITRI   The Death of the Gods 153
MEREJKOWSKI, DMITRI   Peter and Alexis 175
MEREJKOWSKI, DMITRI   The Romance of Leonardo da Vinci 138
MISCELLANEOUS         An Anthology of American Negro Literature 163
                      A Modern Book of Criticism 81
                      Best Ghost Stories 73
                      Best American Humorous Short Stories 87
                      Best Russian Short Stories 18
                      Four Famous Greek Plays 158
                      Fourteen Great Detective Stories 144
                      Great Modern Short Stories 168
                        Edited by Grant Overton and including
                        stories by Joseph Conrad, D. H.
                        Lawrence, Katherine Mansfield,
                        Sherwood Anderson, Glenway Westcott,
                        E. M. Forster, etc.
                      Outline of Abnormal Psychology 152
                      Outline of Psychoanalysis 66
MOLIERE               Plays 78
MOORE, GEORGE         Confessions of a Young Man 16
MORRISON, ARTHUR      Tales of Mean Streets 100

NIETZSCHE, FRIEDRICH  Beyond Good and Evil 20
NIETZSCHE, FRIEDRICH  Ecce Homo and the Birth of Tragedy 68
NIETZSCHE, FRIEDRICH  Genealogy of Morals 62
NIETZSCHE, FRIEDRICH  Thus Spake Zarathustra 9

O'NEILL, EUGENE       The Emperor Jones and The Straw 146
O'NEILL, EUGENE       Seven Plays of the Sea 111

PAINE, THOMAS         Writings 108
PATER, WALTER         The Renaissance 86
PATER, WALTER         Marius the Epicurean 90
PEPYS, SAMUEL         Samuel Pepys' Diary 103
PETRONIUS ARBITER     The Satyricon 156
POE, EDGAR ALLAN      Best Tales 82
PREVOST, ANTOINE      Manon Lescaut 85
PROUST, MARCEL        Swann's Way 59
PROUST, MARCEL        Within A Budding Grove 172

AUTHOR                TITLE AND NUMBER

RODIN                 64 Reproductions 41
ROSTAND, EDMOND       Cyrano de Bergerac 154
RUSSELL, BERTRAND     Selected Papers of Bertrand Russell 137

SALTUS, EDGAR         The Imperial Orgy 139
SCHNITZLER, ARTHUR    Anatol, Green Cockatoo, etc. 32
SCHNITZLER, ARTHUR    Bertha Garlan 39
SCHOPENHAUER          The Philosophy of Schopenhauer 52
SCHOPENHAUER          Studies in Pessimism 12
SCHREINER, OLIVE      The Story of an African Farm 132
SHAW, G.B.            An Unsocial Socialist 15
SMOLLETT, TOBIAS      Humphrey Clinker 159
SPINOZA               The Philosophy of Spinoza 60
STENDHAL              The Red and the Black 157
STERNE, LAURENCE      Tristram Shandy 147
STRINDBERG, AUGUST    Married 2
SUDERMANN, HERMANN    Dame Care 33
SUDERMANN, HERMANN    The Song of Songs 162
SWINBURNE, CHARLES    Poems 23
SYMONDS, JOHN A.      The Life of Michelangelo 49
TCHEKOV               Rothschild's Fiddle, etc. 31
TCHEKOV               Sea Gull, Cherry Orchard, Three Sisters, etc. 171

THOMPSON, FRANCIS     Complete Poems 38
TOLSTOY, LEO          Anna Karenina 37
TOLSTOY, LEO          Redemption and Other Plays 77
TOLSTOY, LEO          The Death of Ivan Ilyitch and Four Other Stories 64
TOMLINSON, H. M.      The Sea and The Jungle 99
TURGENEV, IVAN        Fathers and Sons 21
TURGENEV, IVAN        Smoke 80

VAN LOON, HENDRIK W.  Ancient Man 105
VAN VECHTEN, CARL     Peter Whiffle 164
VILLON, FRANCOIS      Poems 58
VOLTAIRE              Candide 47

WELLS, H.G.           Ann Veronica 27
WHISTLER, J. MCNEIL   The Art of Whistler with 32 Reproductions 150
WHITMAN, WALT         Leaves of Grass 97
WILDE, OSCAR          An Ideal Husband, A Woman of No Importance 84
WILDE, OSCAR          De Profundis 117
WILDE, OSCAR          Dorian Gray 1
WILDE, OSCAR          Poems 19
WILDE, OSCAR          Fairy Tales, Poems in Prose 61
WILDE, OSCAR          Salome, The Importance of Being Earnest, etc. 83
WILDER, THORNTON      The Cabala 155
WOOLF, VIRGINIA       Mrs. Dalloway 96

YEATS, W.B.           Irish Fairy and Folk Tales 44





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Madame Chrysantheme, by Pierre Loti

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MADAME CHRYSANTHEME ***

***** This file should be named 15335-0.txt or 15335-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/5/3/3/15335/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Ronald Holder, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
